CHAPTER XXVIII.  
 
 
 
THEN AND NOW PANORAMIC REVIEW OF CHANGE AND PROGRESS. 603
 
WE have now gone over the successive periods of the history  
of Amherst College during its first half century, and endeavored  
to assign to persons, things and events their proper place in  
that history. A brief general review, however, may give our  
readers a better understanding of the growth and progress of  
the Institution and the changes through which it has passed,  
and will at the same time afford an opportunity of bringing in  
some things for which we have found no other proper place.  
We begin with the 
 
COLLEGE GROUNDS.  
 
At the time when the first efforts were made for founding a  
College in Amherst, Col. Elijah Dickinson, a prominent citizen  
distinguished for his energy and public spirit, owned the farm,  
since known as Judge Dickinson's, which included the hill back  
of the old meeting-house, now College Hill, stretched east as far  
as the East Street and south nearly as far as it did east, and con-  
tained in all two or three hundred acres. Col. Dickinson sub-  
scribed the liberal sum of six hundred dollars to the Charity  
Fund, and was deeply interested in the founding of the College,  
but died, February 1, 1820, some six months before the laying  
of the corner-stone for the first edifice. On the twentyrsecond  
of November, 1820, some three months after the laying of the  
corner-stone, and when the exterior of the building was already  
finished, Mrs. Jerusha Dickinson, widow of Col. Elijah Dickin-  
son, and Moses Dickinson, his son, gave a deed of the land on  
which all the earliest buildings were erected and which formed  
 
 
 
604 HISTORY OF AMHERST COLLEGE.  
 
the center and nucleus of the present College grounds. The  
land, conveyed by this deed, comprised "nine acres more or  
less," and was sold for one thousand one hundred and eighty-  
seven dollars and fifty cents, a part of which is understood to  
have gone to pay Col. Dickinson's subscription. 
[In his report announcing the completion of the fifty thousand dollar subscription,  
Col. Graves speaks of "the -six acres of land given by Col. Elijah Dickinson." See  
p. 50. This donation was afterwards modified, I suppose, as stated in the text  
above. In the vote of the Trustees appointing a Committee to secure the title to  
the land, it is spoken of as ten acres." See page 62.]
On the 7th  
of December, 1827, the widow and heirs of Col. Dickinson fur-  
ther deeded to the Trustees of the College some two and a half  
acres more at the east end of the former lot, and a triangular  
piece of nearly an acre at the south-west corner of the lot to  
make the front, which before was narrower, equal in width to  
the rear, for the consideration of four hundred and fifty dollars,  
thus making the nucleus some twelve acres more or less at a  
cost of one thousand six hundred and thirty-seven dollars and  
fifty cents. It should be added that we find the names of the  
heirs of Col. Dickinson (Moses Dickinson, Jonathan S. Dickin-  
son and Artemas Thompson who married a daughter of Col.  
Dickinson,) as joint subscribers to a bond for one thousand dol-  
lars of the fifteen thousand dollars which was subscribed to  
make the fifty thousand dollar Charity Subscription pass un-  
questioned and unquestionable through the ordeal of the Legis-  
lative Committee in 1824.  
 
In June, 1828, the Trustees purchased of Dea. John Leland  
eleven acres more or less on the west side of the highway be-  
longing originally to the estate of Rev. Dr. Parsons, and includ-  
ing the old "Parsons' House" with other buildings. This is  
the land on which the President's House, the Library and Col-  
lege Hall now stand. The sum paid for it was two thousand  
dollars. It has been squared out by some small pieces not in  
the original purchase, and reduced by the sale of the lots west  
of the "back street," till now it comprises a little over five  
acres.  
 
In January, 1841, on petition of the Trustees, the town con-  
veyed to them without any pecuniary consideration "a quit-  
 
 
 
COLLEGE GROUNDS. 605
 
claim deed " of all that part of the common on Meeting-House  
Hill which lies in front of the original College lot except what  
is needed for a highway, thus connecting the original lot with  
the purchase on the west side, and enabling them for the first  
time to enclose and extend the grounds as far west as the high-  
way and to build upon them. This, of course, includes the site  
of the Octagonal Cabinet and the Observatory.  
 
In June, 1861, the College purchased of Judge John Dickin-  
son for one thousand dollars five acres more of the old Col.  
Dickinson farm, directly back of the original purchase, in order  
to make a better site for the College Church and extend the  
campus towards the east.  
 
In December, 1866, in order to furnish a suitable site for  
Walker Hall, open an avenue along the north side of the cam-  
pus, and clear the way for other improvements, the Trustees  
bought of Lucius Boltwood, Esq., two and a half acres of land,  
one-half acre of which is absorbed in the above mentioned av-  
enue. The sum paid for this purchase was nine thousand nine  
hundred and fifty-six dollars and seventeen cents.  
 
This enumeration of College grounds would be incomplete  
without the mention of seven acres more or less given in trust  
to the Trustees for the use of the College and the community  
by Leavitt Hallock, Esq., and known as the Hallock Park.  
 
The College grounds, exclusive of Hallock Park, now contain  
not far from twenty-seven acres, and cost, for their purchase  
money, not far from fifteen thousand dollars. The reader can  
not have failed to observe the immense difference in the price per  
acre of the first and the last purchase. The first was estimated at  
about one hundred and thirty dollars an acre; the last cost  
about four thousand dollars an acre, a price which all the Trustees  
thought to be exorbitant, and which some protested to the last,  
ought not to be paid, but which was paid because it seemed in-  
dispensable to the perfection of Walker Hall. This history con-  
tains a lesson for the founders of Colleges and Seminaries ; and  
that is, that they should provide ample grounds at the outset to  
meet the future wants of the Institution. Two things, however,  
detract not a little from the practical value of this lesson. In  
the first place, it is impossible to foresee all the future wants of  
 
 
 
606 HISTORY OF AMHERST COLLEGE.  
 
a College that really lives and flourishes. In the second place,  
many a College is too poor at the beginning to provide even for  
the wants which it does foresee. Amherst College is better able  
to pay four thousand dollars an acre for land now than it was to  
pay one hundred and thirty dollars at the beginning. Amherst  
was then very much in the same situation as the man who said,  
he could once have bought the site of Chicago for a pair of  
boots. When asked, why he did not buy it : "I hadn't the pair  
of boots," was the conclusive answer.  
 
Nearly half of the College lot was covered with a grove or  
forest at the time of the original purchase. Another portiorh-was  
set apart, a little while, for cultivation, as a means of self-sup-  
port by the students. " They have purchased a large field on  
the west side of which they have now built the College " so  
says a communication in the Boston Recorder of September 1,  
1821, which, although anonymous, seems to speak by authority,  
" for the express purpose of affording each charity student an  
opportunity of cultivating a quarter or half of an acre in that  
manner which his taste and judgment shall dictate. . . . This is  
an advantage which Amherst College will have over all the  
other Colleges."  
 
The College campus is so uneven in its surface that, with the  
exception perhaps of East College, there has never been a build-  
ing erected on it without considerable expense in grading and  
terracing. The Trustees have at various times appropriated three,  
five, ten, and fifteen hundred dollars for general grading and  
improving of the grounds. The grading about Walker Hall  
cost one thousand five hundred dollars, and all that was done at  
the time, including the avenue in front, cost four thousand dollars.  
 
Ten thousand dollars is probably not an extravagant estimate  
of the money that has been expended for such purposes. Add  
to this the labor that has been given by citizens and volunteered  
by students and the expense is swelled to a still larger aggregate.  
 
COLLEGE EDIFICES.  
 
Some account has already been given of each College edifice,  
in its place in the History, with more or less of detail of the  
process of erection. The following table exhibits in panoramic  
 
 
 
COLLEGE EDIFICES. 607  
 
review the date and cost of the several buildings, and thus the  
growth and progress of the Institution :  
 
[Table: Date_And_Cost_Of_Buildings, Page 607]
 
CARE OF BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS JANITORS.  
 
The office of Janitor, or Professor of Dust and Ashes, in Am-  
herst College is a comparatively recent institution which grew  
up naturally with the growth of the College, and increased with  
its increase till it has become one of our most important offices.  
For many years, the buildings and grounds took care of them-  
selves, were cared for by the spontaneous service of officers and  
students like a small and primitive homestead.by the parents and  
children, or, more generally, were not cared for at all, or at least  
neglected till they became intolerable and then the nuisance was  
abated by some special vote and appointment, or perhaps by the  
spontaneous action of the students. Sometimes an unsightly  
and dilapidated fence which could be endured no longer, disap-  
peared in a moonlight night by the hands of the students work-  
ing under the guidance of a Tutor ; and in due time not in a  
hurry, for that would be indecorous not perhaps for some consid-  
erable time, for the College was poor but sooner or later a bet-  
ter fence took its place. Faculty and students walked in the  
 
 
 
608 HISTORY OF AMHERST COLLEGE.  
 
mud ankle deep over the College grounds and in front of the  
College buildings every spring, till a kind of corduroy pavement  
of rough stones was gradually constructed: when this became  
intolerable, it was torn up, some of the best students in College  
taking part in the process ; and at length it was succeeded gradu-  
ally by fine paving-stones about the buildings, and broad, hard  
and smooth walks all over the campus. Every spring, for many  
years, the students were in the habit of devoting one day to  
raking off the chips and clearing up the grounds. All the ear-  
lier terraces, as we have already seen, were the work of the offi-  
cers and students. The Treasurer, Dea. Leland, usually ^took  
a general oversight and it was very general of the grounds  
and buildings. Sometimes a Professor was specially charged  
with the care and superintendence. The Professors of Physical  
.Science usually had the charge of exhibiting as well as enlarg-  
ing the Cabinets. " Phin Warner " as we used to call him, was  
the first Professor of Dust and Ashes ; and he was Professor  
only in the germ, for he did little more than to take up and  
carry out the ashes from the public and private rooms. Simeon  
Smith was the first who might perhaps be dignified with the  
title of Janitor. He began with sweeping the rooms and halls.  
In 1834, we find his name on the Records of the Trustees as ap-  
pointed Inspector of the College buildings. He gave only a  
limited amount of time to the work and was paid by the day or  
the hour for his services. Mr. Smith died July 23, 1842, and so  
faithfully and satisfactorily had he done his work, that his loss  
was felt to be quite irreparable.  
 
He was succeeded by Josiah Ayers who more than filled the  
vacancy, and exalted the place to a regular department, not  
to say, a professorship. He was at length known chiefly as  
Prof. Ayers. He was Janitor and kept the keys of public  
rooms. He was repairer as well as inspector of buildings. He  
had charge of that delicate and difficult matter, the drawing  
and occupying of rooms by students. In short, all out-of-door  
affairs and everything which no one else could or would do, was  
devolved on him. Yet his salary was never more than three  
hundred dollars. Mr. Ayers was Selectman, member of the Leg-  
islature, deacon of the Church, superintendent of the Sabbath  
 
 
 
JANITORS. 609  
 
School and in all respects a leading citizen. Beloved by officers  
and students, respected by neighbors and acquaintances and la-  
mented by relatives and friends, he died August 4, I860, at the  
age of fifty.  
 
He was succeeded by Oliver Hunt who held the office seven  
years, from October, 1860, till October, 1867, and who, in the  
discharge of his duties, became so familiar with the scientific  
collections that he was a skillful guide to the Cabinets, and so  
well acquainted with the arrangement of the books that, on the  
retirement of Mr. Boltwood, he acted as Assistant Librarian.  
 
On the resignation of Mr. Hunt in 1867, George H. Prince  
was appointed Janitor and, if money could have retained him,  
would have remained such to this day. But much to the regret  
of Faculty and students, he resigned in 1871, and insisted on  
the acceptance of his resignation. He is now one of the Select-  
men of Amherst. Sanson Gates is the present Janitor.  
 
Not long after Dr. Stearns came into the presidency, a colored  
man who had been for some years a servant in his family, hav-  
ing married and desiring a home of his own and constant occu-  
pation, became Assistant Janitor, and ere long a house was built  
for him in the rear of the President's house, which has now be-  
come one of the College fixtures. His name is Charles Thomp-  
son. Known sometimes as " Tutor Charlie," and sometimes as  
''Prof. Charlie," he is one of the most useful and without excep-  
tion probably the most popular officer on the College premises.  
His portrait may be seen, with the insignia of his office, in the  
class-books of all the classes, for the last twelve or fifteen years.  
 
Besides the janitor and his assistant, a third man is now em-  
ployed much of the time on the College buildings and grounds.  
The College, like other people who live in large houses, is under  
the necessity of employing many hands to keep up the estab-  
lishment.  
 
There was another man, who although he never was officially  
janitor or sub-janitor, yet, for a third of a century, sustained a  
somewhat similar and no less important relation. He kept in  
repair the locks and keys of all the public and private rooms  
in College, yes, and of all the trunks, drawers and lockers  
in the village. He kept the College clock, and all the other  
 
 
 
610 HISTORY OF AMHERST COLLEGE.  
 
clocks in town, in running order. He repaired or manufactured  
apparatus in all the departments as every Professor had need.  
In short, he made whatever no one else could make, repaired  
everything that nobodj 7 - else could repair, did everything that  
no other mechanic could do, and was the general engineer and  
mechanical genius of the town and the College. It is he of whom  
Prof. Snell says in his address at the opening of Walker Hall ;  
" the old gentleman is to this day very fond of calling me his  
apprentice." It will be seen that I refer to Mr. David Parsons.  
He was born June 10, 1788, and died June 17, 1872, at the age  
of eighty-four. He was living at the opening of Walker^Hall,  
living when I wrote the incident of his boyhood in the first  
chapter of this History, but died a month or two before it went  
to press. The son of Rev. Dr. David Parsons, ,the first Presi-  
dent of the Board of Trustees, he possessed not a little of his  
father's genius, and to stand by him and hear him talk as he  
was repairing some hopelessly dilapidated clock, or pump, or  
piece of apparatus, was as instructive as a lecture, and more  
amusing than a comedy.  
 
FUNDS.  
 
The " Fifty Thousand Dollar Charity Fund " was the only  
permanent fund of the College for nearly a quarter of a century.  
The history of the raising of that fund has been given in one  
of our early chapters. I am indebted to Rev. Christopher Gush-  
ing, D. D., the oldest member of the Board of Overseers, and the  
Secretary of the Board, for the following history of its growth  
and administration.  
 
The first meeting of the Board of Overseers of the Charity  
Fund was held August 28, 1822. There were present Rev. The-  
ophilus Packard, Gen. Salem Towne, Jr., H. Wright Strong,  
Esq., and Rev. Thomas Snell. The record designates the fund  
as that " upon which is founded the Charity Institution in Am-  
herst." Having chosen Lucius Boltwood, Esq., Auditor, and  
elected Rev. Samuel Osgood an Overseer, the Board adjourned  
" to the day of examination at the close of the next quarter in  
Amherst Academy." Thus the Board of Overseers antedates  
the College.  
 
 
 
THE CHARITY FUXD. 611  
 
Previous to 1824, the income from the fund was applied to  
students in the Academy and to those who were in " the Colle-  
giate Institution " indiscriminately ; but in that year and ever  
afterward it was appropriated exclusively to students in " the  
Collegiate Institution." The " Charter " is recognized in 1825  
and the Charity Institution is called a " College " in 1826.  
 
The Board of Trustees having proposed " so far to alter the  
Constitution as to unite at their pleasure the offices of Financier  
and Treasurer in one and the same person, the Board of Over-  
seers . . . voted unanimously to alter said Constitution as pro-  
posed," August 22, 1826. The name of the financial officer was  
changed from Financier to Commissioner in 1842.  
 
In accordance with a suggestion made by the Overseers in  
1865, the avails of the Charity Funds have since that date been  
made the basis of Ministerial Scholarships, yielding each bene-  
ficiary sixty dollars a year, and to a few beneficiaries a larger  
sum. The original amount of the fund was fifty-one thousand  
four hundred and four dollars. 
[Cf. p. 50.]
By the Constitution and By-  
laws in accordance with which the fund is managed, one-sixth  
of the income is required to be added annually to the principal.  
 
It is not known that there has ever been any loss of any por-  
tion of the fund. In tt few instances there has been loss of  
interest, while on the other hand there have been some thousands  
of dollars of extra interest received through the premium on  
gold, and by judicious investments some thousands of dollars  
have been realized as "increment" in distinction from income.  
Thus the amount of the fund now reaches the sum of seventy-  
two thousand dollars. The available income of the fund from  
1827 to 1872 inclusive, has been over one hundred and twenty-  
six thousand dollars. During these forty-six years the entire  
expense of taking care of the fund has been something over  
ten thousand dollars, and the amount given to students has been  
over one hundred and sixteen thousand dollars.  
 
In 1864 the Overseers voted unanimously " That in our opin-  
ion any student who shall be convicted of the vicious habit of  
' hazing Freshmen ' should be cut off from all aid from the Char-  
ity Fund." In 1871, the Overseers " Voted, that it is the unan-  
 
* Cf. p. 50.  
 
 
 
612 HISTORY OF AMHERST COLLEGE.  
 
imous opinion of this Board that no student who uses intoxi-  
cating drinks as a beverage, or tobacco in any form, should be  
regarded as a suitable person to receive aid from the Charitable  
Funds of this College."  
 
Rev. Samuel Osgood, D. D., of Springfield was a member of  
the Board thirty-eight years, and Rev. Thomas Snell, D. D..  
of North Brookfield, thirty-three years. No other person has  
ever been connected with the Board for even twenty-five years.  
There have been but two deaths of members during their con-  
nection with the Board.  
 
In 1863 the Board adopted the following minute : 'WThe  
Board of Overseers of the Charity Fund of Amherst College,  
recognizing the providence of God in the removal of one of their  
number by death, record with gratitude the remarkable fact,  
that during the forty-two years of the existence of this Board  
there has never, until this year, been any instance of death  
among its members.  
 
"And whereas the late Hon. Ithamar Conkey, who held a seat  
as a member of this Board sixteen years, during which time he  
was never absent from the annual meeting, except in a single  
instance, and who presided as Chairman of the Board for four-  
teen years, has been removed from us by the hand of God, we  
would also express our appreciation of the punctuality, accu-  
racy, courtesy, integrity and Christian character of our departed  
brother, and our sympathy with the bereaved family in this  
afflictive providence."  
 
In 1870 the Board adopted the following : " Whereas our  
esteemed associate, the Hon. Edward South worth, since our last  
meeting, in the providence of God, has been removed from us  
by death, we would record our appreciation of his financial skill,  
his cultured manners, and his strict integrity remembering his  
high standard as to the responsibilities of a fiduciary trust, and  
his grateful companionship, we mourn his loss."  
 
The Secretaries of the Board have been as follows : Rev.  
Thomas Snell, D. D., 1822-36, fifteen years ; Rev. Cyrus Mann,  
1837-38, two years ; Thomas Bond, Esq., 1839-46, eight years;  
Hon. William Hyde, 1847-57, eleven years ; Rev. Christopher  
dishing, 1858-.  
 
 
 
CASH FUNDS. 613  
 
The following is the list of Auditors with their terms of ser-  
vice : Lucius Boltwood, Esq., 1822-33, twelve years ; Rev.  
Samuel Ware, 1833-55, twenty-two years ; Moses B. Green, A.  
B., 1855-65, ten years ; Rodolphus B. Hubbard, A. M., 1866-69,  
four years ; George Montague, Esq., 1870-.  
 
Only one Auditor has died in office.  
 
In 1866 the Board voted, " That, as in the providence of God  
the Auditor of this Board, Moses B. Green, Esq., has been re-  
moved by death, we would record our appreciation of his faith-  
fulness in the discharge of his official duties, and our affectionate  
remembrance of his many gentle and amiable virtues."  
 
The donors and dates of the other funds which, with the ex-  
ception of the Sears, have all been founded under the presi-  
dencies of Dr. Hitchcock and Dr. Stearns, may be seen in the  
chapters on their administrations. The following statement of  
the Treasurer, Hon. Edward Dickinson, exhibits the present  
amount of the cash funds of the College, as estimated in round  
numbers, and classified under several heads, together with the  
estimated annual income and expenditure :  
 
[Table: Cash_Funds_Of_Amherst_College, Page 613]
 
The entire property of the College, including buildings,  
 
 
 
614 HISTORY OF AMHERST COLLEGE.  
 
grounds, collections, etc., as well as cash funds, is estimated  
in round numbers at over a million of dollars.  
 
LIBRARY AND LIBRARIANS.  
 
Beginning with a few theological and miscellaneous books,  
presented chiefly by ministers, collected in a chamber at Mrs.  
Montague's and deposited first in a single case in the entry of  
South College, then on a few shelves in a room in Middle Col-  
lege, the Library of Amherst College first had a local habitation,  
called the Library, in the third story of the Chapel building in  
1827, and it was not till 1853 that the present Library buflxling  
was erected expressly and exclusively for its use. The archi-  
tect calculated that the shelves of the principal story, without  
the basement, would contain forty thousand volumes, which  
was thought to be all the accommodation that would be needed  
for fifty years. The Library now numbers about twenty-seven  
thousand volumes, and it not only fills to overflowing the prin-  
cipal story, but having displaced the reading-room
[The reading-room, containing the principal American and foreign quarterlies,  
and some of the magazines, is now accommodated on the floor of the upper hall, or  
Library proper. Besides this the students have a reading-room, containing the  
newspapers, in North College.]
and the  
Trustees' room, is now fast filling the " lower hall " or base-  
ment, and in a very few years will require an addition, or a new  
building. Dependent the first twenty years, or more, on sub-  
scriptions, or special appropriations from the general treasury,  
it now has permanent funds and an annual income which, the  
year past, has been nearly two thousand dollars, and which, by  
the conditions of the Sears Fund, is continually increasing.  
 
Prof. Estabrook was the first Librarian from 1821 to  
1823. Tutor Clapp then had charge of it for one year. Prof.  
Worcester was Librarian from 1824 till 1827. Prof. Snell held  
the office from 1827 to 1852 a quarter of a century ! His  
salary was forty dollars ! ! At the close of his term of office the  
Library contained only about ten thousand volumes, had no  
printed or classified catalogue, was opened only once a week for  
drawing books, and furnished no facilities for reference or read-  
ing in the room.  
 
 
 
LIBRARIANS. 615  
 
With the prospect of a new building and a more rapid increase  
of books, the Library seemed to require the time and services  
of a Librarian. Lucius Manlius Bolt wood was appointed to  
the office in 1852, and held it for eleven years, during which  
time the books were arranged and shelved in the new buildings,  
catalogued anew and more perfectly, and nearly doubled in num-  
ber. The first printed catalogue was published in 1855, and  
contained about twelve thousand volumes. The card catalogue  
was also commenced by Mr. Boltwood.  
 
The present Librarian, Prof. William L. Montague, who was  
appointed in 1864, has prepared a complete card catalogue of  
authors alphabetically arranged, a manuscript catalogue of all  
the books classified according to departments and subjects, and  
a continuation of Poole's Index to the principal quarterlies in  
the Library, printed a new catalogue of additions containing  
more than fourteen thousand three hundred volumes, and de-  
vised and put in execution a plan for utilizing the whole building  
so as to supersede for the present the necessity of a new edifice.  
All that can be done for the Library by a Librarian who is at the  
same time a Professor charged with the care of a department in  
the College, has been done by Prof. Montague. But one of the  
most imperative wants of the College now is a Librarian who with  
all the learning, culture, Weight of character and personal inter-  
est of a Professor, should give his whole time to the Library,  
especially in the way of making it in the largest measure avail-  
able for the use of the Faculty and students.  
 
The following statistics, furnished by the Librarian, will be  
interesting to some of our readers, and may furnish a standard  
of comparison for future times :  
 
[Table: Library_Numbers, Page 615] 
 
 
 
616 HISTORY OP AMHERST COLLEGE.  
 
[Table: Library_Numbers, Page 615]
 
In estimating this last item, only about five hundred dollars  
of Prof. Montague's salary is charged to the Library. The re-  
mainder is paid to two students who serve as his assistants.  
 
LABORATORY AND CABINETS.  
 
The Chemical Laboratory was born in 1822, I believe, in one  
of the lower rooms in South College was cradled, together  
with Physics, Philosophy, Rhetoric, Religion and I know not  
how many other nurselings, in that marvelous phalanstery, so  
humorously described by President Humphrey, and Dr. Hitch-  
cock, in the fourth story south entry of North College at-  
tained its majority in the cellar or basement at the west end  
of the Chapel building, and now in its mature manhood, it has  
spread itself and taken entire and exclusive possession of the  
first floor in Williston Hall. Alumni who return to visit the  
old homestead find more difficulty in recognizing in the full-  
grown man a single feature of the infa'nt, the child or the youth  
with whom they were acquainted in their College days, than  
they do in recognizing each other after an absence of a quarter  
or half a century. The most novel and characteristic feature  
of the new Laboratory in Williston Hall is the working-room  
furnished with tables, bowls, blow-pipes, etc., etc., which are  
kept in almost constant use, not unfrequently in vacation as  
well as term-time, by students in analytic chemistry.  
 
The history of the " Philosophical Cabinet," as we used to  
call Prof. Snell's apparatus for the illustration of physics and  
the room in which it was contained, was given by the Professor  
himself at the opening of "Walker Hall, better than it can be  
given by anybody else. There is no fault to be found with it  
except that with characteristic modesty " the half has not been  
told." We copy it almost entire :  
 
" Soon after Amherst College was opened for the reception  
 
 
 
APPARATUS. 617  
 
of students, in September, 1821, a few second-hand articles of  
English apparatus were purchased of Dr. Prince of Salem.  
These were, a set of simple machines, a small air-pump, an elec-  
trical machine, a compound microscope, a solar microscope, a  
magic-lantern, and a limited number of small articles to accom-  
pany them. There was also a pair of globes, and a small  
Gregorian telescope. The collection had probably done long  
service elsewhere ; and some of the articles were much worn.  
The air-pump was especially infirm, and would generally fail  
before a lecture was closed, unable to draw another breath.  
 
" When the North College was erected, in 1822, the southern  
half of the fourth story was devoted to public uses. The space  
now occupied by the entry and corner-rooms was used for a  
Chapel. The back middle-room contained the College Library ;  
and the front middle, the apparatus both in natural philosophy  
and chemistry ; and lectures in both of these departments, in-  
deed on all subjects, were given in the Chapel, the simple pulpit  
at the west end serving as a lecturing-desk.  
 
" Prof. Olds, the first incumbent of the chair of natural phi-  
losophy, and Prof. Jacob Abbott, his successor, had only the  
meagre collection already described with which to illustrate the  
principles of the science. In 1831, Prof. Hovey, the successor  
of Prof. Abbott, visited Europe for his health ; and the oppor-  
tunity was seized upon by the friends of the College to solicit  
contributions, and to commission the Professor to purchase  
books for the Library, and apparatus for the scientific depart-  
ments. I think, about four thousand dollars were raised for  
these purposes. The principal part of the philosophical cabinet  
was procured of Pixii of Paris, and cost somewhat less than two  
thousand dollars.  
 
" The Chapel building which had been erected in 1826, be-  
tween the North and South Colleges, had a room appropriated  
to the uses of the philosophical apparatus ; and the few articles  
first purchased of Dr. Prince had been placed in it. Previous  
to the purchases made by Prof. Hovey, all the instruments be-  
longing to the department were accommodated on one wide  
shelf extending half round that room. After the new apparatus  
had arrived, and before Prof. Hovey's return, the whole was  
 
 
 
618 HISTORY OF AMHERST COLLEGE.  
 
unpacked, and the parts put together at my own house, where  
it stood in two unoccupied rooms till cases could be erected for  
it in the room of the chapel building. From 1827 to 1870, a  
period of forty-three years, this collection of instruments has  
been kept in the same room, new cases having been repeatedly  
added as they were needed ; but for the last eight or ten years  
the cases have become so crowded, that, when a new article was  
wanted, the first question to be answered was, " Is there any  
room for it ? " And this want of space for the safe and con-  
venient accommodation of new instruments has of late been a  
serious difficulty in the way of increasing the collection. >. In  
quantity, and, as I think, in real utility, it is now just about  
double of what it was immediately after the purchases were  
made in 1831.  
 
" It may not be improper for me to state in what way this  
increase has been made. But let me premise, that, for a few  
years after Prof. Hovey's purchases, the philosophical apparatus  
of Amherst College had a high reputation. It was extensive  
for that day ; and the articles, mostly of French construction,  
were very neat and beautiful when compared with the old and  
heavy English instruments which were to be found in most of  
the Colleges. Professors from several Institutions came to ex-  
amine it; and the establishment of Pixii received not a few  
large orders from the United States in consequence of the ex-  
ample set by this College.  
 
" Every department of knowledge, however, is progressive.  
Whatever completeness the appliances for giving instruction  
may possess this year, they will be found deficient the next.  
Hence I very soon found it necessary to furnish myself with ad-  
ditional pieces, either for the illustration of newly-discovered  
facts and principles, or for the more perfect presentation of those  
already known. But how should this be done ? The College  
was poor, and the money already expended had been begged  
from friends who supposed they had set her up for a life-time.  
It would not do to apply to them again so soon. Of course, the  
College must appropriate a little to the several departments in  
order to keep things in repair. The problem was, how with  
that little (which for this department did not, for a considera-  
 
 
 
PROF. SHELL'S WORKSHOP. 619  
 
ble time, exceed twenty-five dollars a year), how with that  
small sum, to preserve the apparatus in a decent condition in  
spite of wear and accident, and also to make occasional addi-  
tions and improvements.  
 
" With all my want of qualifications for my position, of which  
none can be so fully aware as myself, I found one thing greatly  
in my favor. I was born a Yankee, and from childhood had  
been fond of whittling. The Department of Natural Philosophy  
gave me the opportunity of indulging in this kind of recreation.  
Before I could afford to buy tools, or fit up a shop I begged the  
use of both from my worthy friend Mr. David Parsons, who is  
a most skillful mechanic himself, and who gave me gratuitously  
a multitude of valuable hints. The old gentleman is to this day  
very fond of calling me his apprentice. The Department of Nat-  
ural Philosophy in Amherst College owes not a little, both di-  
rectly and indirectly, to the skill and kindness of Mr. Parsons.  
By slow degrees I procured tools for myself, and at length set  
up shop in the rear part of my house, where, during each of  
the last thirty years, I have done more or less of mechanical  
work. I have repaired instruments which needed repair; a  
considerable number I improved, so that they serve their pur-  
poses better, or else answer another purpose beside that for  
which they were originally designed ; and not a few I have  
wholly made, either from published descriptions, or from designs  
of my own.  
 
44 The most valuable article which my private workshop  
now contains is not my own, but belongs to the College. It  
is an engine lathe, turned by the foot ; and was given by  
James T. Ames, Esq., of Chicopee, for the benefit of the de-  
partment.  
 
" The average appropriation to the Department of Natural  
Philosophy from 1828 to 1869 has been about sixty-five dollars  
per year, a sum which could hardly be expected to do more  
than keep the apparatus in tolerable repair. And yet, as I have  
already said, this annual allowance has served to double the  
value of the collection.  
 
" Now that the collection is to occupy a spacious and hand-  
some apartment, I trust the Walker funds will avail to replace  
 
 
 
620 HISTORY OF AMHERST COLLEGE.  
 
many cheap-looking instruments by more comely and fitting  
ones, as well as to add a number of others which I have for  
some time wished to procure, but which the former room was  
not large enough to accommodate, nor the resources of the de-  
partment sufficient to purchase."  
 
The history of the " Natural History Cabinets " for the first  
' forty years and more occupies thirty pages of Dr. Hitchcock's  
" Reminiscences of Amherst College." It is the most fascina-  
ting portion of the book, and one of the most charming specimens  
of autobiography blended with history that can be found in  
modern literature. How the nucleus was formed by the unipn  
of his own private collection of a few hundred specimens with  
one already begun by the Natural History Society which he  
found here in 1826, the larger part of both which collections,  
he playfully remarks, would probably come under the title of  
jactalites or specimens to be thrown away how this was in-  
creased by his own collections when he was making the geologi-  
cal survey of Massachusetts, and by contributions from gradu-  
ates, especially foreign missionaries how further accessions were  
made by bequests of Prof. Hovey, by donations from Prof.  
Shepard and Prof. Adams, by exchange and purchase from  
European collections, and by contributions from the classes,  
such for example as the huge bowlder weighing over eight tons  
which the Class of '57 transported half a mile and placed, where  
it now lies, in front of Woods Cabinet the sympathizing de-  
scription of the origin and progress of the Shepard and the  
Adams Cabinets and his admiring notices of the men who cre-  
ated them and above all that romantic history of the Ichno-  
logical Cabinet begun in 1835 with the Greenfield " turkey  
tracks," and the South Hadley " tracks of poultry " or of  
" Noah's raven " and continued with the ridicule or the pity of  
the masses and the opposition of men of science generally, but  
with the sympathy and support of a few " noble " and " emi-  
nent" savants, and the pecuniary aid of not a few generous per-  
sonal friends and friends of the College, till at length Ichnology  
was recognized as an established science, and the Appleton Cab-  
inet became a geological or palseontological Mecca, the resort of  
scientific pilgrims from all lands all this forms a history of  
 
 
 
NATURAL HISTORY CABINETS. 621  
 
unique and unsurpassed interest which, to be appreciated, must  
be read, as it is narrated by him who was at once the author  
of the book and the founder of the Cabinets, in his inimitable  
autobiography. Not the least entertaining passages in the nar-  
ratives are those in which he reports the comments of the by-  
standers as they witnessed his enthusiasm in making these col-  
lections such as these, for example :  
 
" After the auction at Greenfield, I employed a wagoner to  
transport my specimens to the railroad. I happened to be a  
little out of sight and heard him describing to a citizen, standing  
by, the sums I had paid for them. ' The man,' said the citi-  
zen, ' who will waste money like that, should have a guardian  
placed over him.'  
 
" A large crowd had gathered when I took the first cast, and  
I was told afterwards that all which saved me from being voted  
a fit subject for a lunatic asylum, was the testimony of a young  
lady, in one of the adjoining houses, who had attended my lec-  
tures on geology at Amherst, and who testified that I was no  
more deranged than such men usually are."  
 
[Uncited footnote: Of tracks on the sidewalks of Greenwich street in New York City.]

Another thing with which one cannot but be struck in read-  
ing Dr. Hitchcock's Reminiscences of his Cabinets, and also in  
visiting the Cabinets themselves, is the pains he has taken to  
perpetuate the name of every contributor whether of money, or  
of specimens, however small the contribution may have been.  
He had a good memory, the memory of a grateful heart ; and it  
will not be his fault, if the donors to his Cabinets are not held  
in everlasting remembrance.  
 
The Conchological and the Ichnological collections remain  
to this day very much as they were left by the respective found-  
ers at the time of their death, the former reminding one of a  
book suddenly interrupted by the death of its author which  
must remain forever unfinished the latter suggesting those  
Cyclopean foundations at Baalbec whose builders were arrested  
by some mysterious cause and those who came after them never  
even attempted to complete the edifice. The Hitchcock Ichno-  
logical Cabinet, however, is much more than a foundation it is  
probably a pretty complete collection of the principal genera and  
 
 
 
622 HISTORY OF AMHERST COLLEGE.  
 
species as they exist in the sandstone of the Connecticut Valley,  
and the proper work of his successors will be not so much to  
add to the collections, as to study and interpret them in the  
light of advancing science in future ages.  
 
The Zoological Museum has received many valuable additions  
within the last ten years, especially in the department of Com-  
parative Osteology to which Prof. Edward Hitchcock, Jr., has  
given especial attention. Indeed the Gorilla, the Megatherium,  
most of the skeletons and stuffed skins of quadrupeds, and the  
greater part of the specimens which now attract chief attention  
in the upper story of the Appleton Cabinet have been added  
during this period. The following memorandum of Prof. Hitch-  
cock will indicate the sources from which these additions have  
chiefly come : " Friends have given me within five years five  
hundred and ninety-five dollars and fifty-four cents to buy speci-  
mens in Comparative Osteology. From 1859 to 1865, the Trus-  
tees appropriated three hundred dollars each year, most of which  
was expended in new specimens for the Zoological Cabinet.  
Since then they have appropriated about one hundred and sev-  
enty-five dollars per annum for the same purpose. In addition  
we have had contributions from various sources which, I esti-  
mate, will average two hundred and fifty dollars a year. Of  
this our graduate foreign missionaries have furnished at least  
one-half." Some of the rarest and finest specimens have been  
given by Rev. William Walker and Rev. Josiah Tyler, mission-  
aries to Western and Southern Africa. The greater part of  
these contributions were received in response to a circular ad-  
dressed by Prof. Hitchcock to the Alumni, in which such con-  
tributions were invited.  
 
The following brief history of- the origin and progress of the  
Shepard Cabinet, and the means and processes of its growth, has  
been furnished at my request by the Professor himself:  
 
" My Mineralogical Cabinet was commenced at the age of fif-  
teen, while a member of the Providence Grammar School ; and  
was brought with me when I left Brown University to join the  
Sophomore Class, of Amherst Institution, in 1821. An early  
visit after my arrival here to the Tourmaline, and other locali-  
ties of Chesterfield and Goshen served to increase my eagerness  
 
 
 
THE SHEPARD CABINET. 623  
 
as a collector, and at the same time placed me in possession of  
abundant materials for exchange. In 1823, my identification of  
the previously supposed white augite of Goshen, with the spe-  
cies Spodumene gave me confidence in the study of minerals,  
while it increased my stock of specimens desirable to mineralo-  
gists. The exchange I then carried on with the Austrian Con-  
sul-General, Baron von Lederer, in behalf of his own collection  
and that of the Imperial Cabinet of Vienna, rapidly enriched  
my little museum in foreign minerals. Indeed, from the first, it  
was sufficiently ample to serve a useful purpose in the instruc-  
tion of beginners ; and was the sole resource of Prof. Amos  
Eaton in the lectures he gave during two seasons, before the  
students of the Institution.  
 
On leaving College, I resided a year partly in Cambridge  
and partly in Boston, during which period I profited much in  
extending my collections through visits to new localities in  
Eastern Massachusetts and Rhode Island, and still more, by ex-  
changes with Prof. Nuttall and other active cultivators of Min-  
eralogy in the region. I soon after made a very successful tour  
into Maine, where at Paris, I was the fortunate discoverer of  
the most remarkable green and red Tourmalines then known.  
With some of these I made profitable exchanges with the Brit-  
ish Museum and other large collections. My association in 1828  
with Prof. Silliman as his assistant, and afterwards with the  
College as a lecturer on Natural Science for many years, afforded  
me unusual facilities for the extension of my Cabinet. All the  
best localities of Connecticut were frequently visited, specimens  
of rare interest secured, and the means of supplying scientific  
correspondents abundantly obtained. These objects were still  
further effected by journeys into adjoining States and the Cana-  
das, until 1835, when I became Professor of Chemistry in the  
Medical College of the State of South Carolina, where a new  
and very ample field was opened for the extension of my col-  
lections. From that time to the present, with the exception of  
the period of the civil war, I have passed nearly the half of  
each year in the South, and been engaged to a considerable ex-  
tent in scientific and mining explorations, which have resulted  
in varied and rich contributions to my Cabinet. These travels  
 
 
 
624 HISTORY OF AMHERST COLLEGE.  
 
have also embraced the Western, or Mississippi States, attended  
by similar results. But most of all, have I gained by frequent  
excursions to the Old World, having since 1839 twelve times  
visited Europe, where my exchanges and purchases of speci-  
mens have been conducted on a scale, I am led to believe, not  
surpassed by any of my countrymen. Numbers, however, have  
never been my aim in these acquisitions. I have rather sought  
what was characteristic and instructive, not however to the neg-  
lect of the rare and beautiful.  
 
" Thus far I have had the mineralogical collection in mind in  
this narrative of its origin and growth. It may be added that the  
augmentation of my Geological Cabinet has for the last twenty  
years kept pace with that of my minerals. That is especially  
remarkable for fossil remains, characteristic of the leading geo-  
logic formations, beginning with the Silurian and coming down  
to the Post Pliocene. While it is well supplied with specimens  
of foreign origin, particularly- from Great Britain, Germany and  
France, it is not too much perhaps to claim, that its representa-  
tion of southern Post Pliocene is one of the most complete hith-  
erto made, including as it does large portions of two very inter-  
esting Mastodons and a profusion of fossil fish teeth, the result  
of uncommon opportunities for collecting afforded through a  
long residence of myself and son in South Carolina.  
 
" Of the meteoric collection, now the fourth in extent and value  
known, it may be observed that its formation commenced in  
1828, in my examination and analysis of the Richmond meteor-  
ite ; and it is wanting in very few authentic localities belonging  
to this continent that have been described since that date. To  
obtain these acquisitions, it has often been necessary to employ  
considerable sums of money for their purchase ; but portions of  
the material thus acquired have been advantageously employed  
in exchanges with foreign cabinets for the supply of distant  
localities in no other way obtainable.  
 
" The removal of these collections from New Haven to Am-  
herst in 1847 was the result of an understanding entered into be-  
tween President Hitchcock and myself, that if the College would  
cause a fire-proof building to be erected for their reception, I  
would deposit them therein, at least for a term of years, and  
 
 
 
FACULTY, STUDENTS AND TERM-BILLS. 625  
 
with the hope, through arrangements afterwards to be made, of  
leaving them with the College as a permanent possession. Such  
a building was provided in the Woods Cabinet ; and more re-  
cently, the conditions for the purchase of the collections have  
been agreed upon, which if faithfully complied with, will con-  
summate the original plan.  
 
" On the transfer of the mineralogical collection to the new  
rooms in the Walker building, the whole of the space formerly  
occupied by the entire collection in the second story of the  
Woods Cabinet is now devoted to the Geological and Meteoric  
Cabinets; and such has been their recent growth, the room  
thus afforded is found barely sufficient for their present accom-  
modation.  
 
"The labor in which I am at present occupied is the more  
perfect arrangement and cataloguing of the three collections  
a work of much labor, and not likely to be completed short of  
one or two years."  
 
FACULTY, STUDENTS, SALARIES, BILLS AND OTHER EXPENSES.  
 
In 1821-2, the first year of the existence of the College, the  
Faculty consisted of four persons, the President, two Professors  
and one Tutor. At the close of the half century, the Faculty  
numbered twenty, viz. : the President, thirteen Professors, three  
Lecturers and three Instructors. The number of students whose  
names appear on the first Catalogue issued in May, 1822, was  
fifty-nine, viz. : three Seniors, six Juniors, nineteen Sophomores  
and thirty-one Freshmen. The number of students at the time  
of the semi-centennial was two hundred and sixty-one, viz. :  
sixty-five Seniors, forty-nine Juniors, seventy-six Sophomores  
and seventy-one Freshmen. The term-bills at the beginning  
were about thirty-one dollars and fifty cents a year ; at the end  
of the half century they had risen to about one hundred dollars  
a year. Then board cost seventy-five cents a week in clubs, and  
from one dollar to one dollar and twenty-five cents in families ;  
now it averages about three dollars and fifty cents in clubs and  
about five dollars in families. Then wood was from one dollar  
and fifty cents to two dollars a cord, and washing " from twelve  
to 'twenty cents a week;" now wood is from six dollars and  
 
 
 
626 HISTORY OF AMHERST COLLEGE.  
 
fifty cents to nine dollars a cord ; and washing from fifty to sev-  
enty-five cents a dozen. The expenses which students impose  
upon themselves for Societies, Class-day and Commencement,  
music, boating, and amusements have risen in far greater pro-  
portion. Then the President's salary was twelve hundred dol-  
lars, that of a Professor eight hundred, and that of a Tutor  
four hundred ; now the President's salary is thirty-two hundred  
dollars, 
[With the perquisites.]
a Professor's twenty-five hundred, and an Instructor's  
twelve hundred and fifty. Then the Treasurer's salary was  
three hundred dollars, now it is two thousand.  
 
My esteemed colleague, Prof. Edward Hitchcock, has exam-  
ined with great care the statistics of the College for each year  
of the half century and exhibited the result in tables which he  
has kindly furnished me for the readers of this history. The  
accompanying chart, also prepared by him, illustrates the same  
by a diagram which presents to the eye a comparative view  
of the state of the College through the half century. The  
industry and ingenuity which these illustrations exhibit, can  
hardly fail to suggest to our readers that the author of them is  
a chip of the old block and deserves the name he bears.  
[This ingenuity proved to be too much for the printer, and the diagram, as  
printed, is shorn of its most striking features.]
 
[Table: Statistics_Related_To_Student_Count, Page 626]
 
 
 
STATISTICS OF THE HALF CENTURY. 627  
 
[Table: Statistics_Related_To_Student_Count, Page 626] 
 
 
 
628 HISTORY OF AMHERST COLLEGE.  
 
[Table: Statistics_Related_To_Student_Count, Page 626]  
 
SOCIETIES.  
 
The history of the " Literary Societies " of Amherst runs par-  
allel with the history of the College and forms no unimportant  
part of it. For the first five or six years, first by allotment and  
then by elective affinity, all the students of College, fell into the  
Alexandrian or the Athenian Society as naturally and spontane-  
ously as all the citizens of a town or of the country fall into one  
or the other of two great parties. And the members of the  
Societies no more thought of being absent from "the weekly  
meetings than a good citizen would absent himself from the  
polls ; and when at length absences did sometimes occur, the  
Societies did not hesitate to impose fines on the delinquents, and  
collect them too, just as, in the good old times of the Athenian  
republic, the laws imposed a penalty on citizens who took neither  
side in affairs of state. " The rivalry between the Alexandrian  
and Athenian Societies in the first two years of their history,"  
writes Rev. Mr. Packard of the Class of '23, " was earnest, ac-   
 
 
 
THE LITERARY SOCIETIES. 629  
 
tive, shrewd but friendly and pleasant. I regard these Societies  
to have been more beneficial to their members in writing, decla-  
mation and debate, than all the College exercises in these de-  
partments." In 1823, the Societies transferred their meetings  
from the South to the then new North College, and held them,  
one in the " Chapel " in the fourth story of the South entry,  
and the other in the " Sophomore Recitation Room," No. 3 of  
South entry, occupying the rooms alternately each for a term  
as the Chapel was the more desirable room of the two. In 1825,  
a misunderstanding arose in regard to the occupancy of the  
Chapel, both claimed it and "rushed" in to pre-occupy it, both  
Presidents took the chair side by side in the desk, both Secre-  
taries read their records at the same time, appointees from both  
Societies began and continued to declaim together in short a  
scene was enacted very much like that which attended the "rup-  
ture " of the Presbyterian Church of the United States ten years  
later, and with a similar result. The Alexandrian Society with-  
drew from the " United Fraternity " a union which had hith-  
erto made the two Societies substantially one in regard to the  
use of their libraries, the holding of joint exhibitions and occa-  
sional meetings, and some other purposes the allotment system  
was broken up, and the two Societies entered upon a new era  
of fierce and not always friendly rivalry, in which every mem-  
ber esteemed it his first duty to labor and spend and be spent  
for his Society.  
 
On the completion of the new Chapel building in 1827, the  
Faculty proposed to the two Societies to bring their libraries  
into the room which had been prepared for the College Libra-  
ries. To this proposal, the Athenian Society and a majority of  
the Alexandrian acceded, and the three libraries were brought  
together in the new room now divided into numbers nine and  
ten over the small Chapel. But about two-fifths of the Alex-  
andrians and a few of the Athenians opposed, discussed and re-  
monstrated, and when all their opposition proved unavailing,  
they withdrew and formed a new Society, the Social Union.  
This was a secret Society, and so contagious was this new prin-  
ciple of secrecy, that it soon extended to the old Societies, and  
they were all secret Societies till, some ten or a dozen years  
 
 
 
630 HISTORY OF AMHERST COLLEGE.  
 
later, one after another, they all abolished the secrecy. The  
triangular fight which followed the formation of a third Society,  
now raged more fiercely than the duel which preceded it. The  
contest for the superiority in numbers ran so high that the Fac-  
ulty were obliged to interfere and enforce again a system of  
equal allotment. The rivalry showed itself in liberal contribu-  
tions, often beyond the means of the members, ten, twenty,  
thirty, forty, fifty dollars apiece for the increase of the libra-  
ries. Loyalty, zeal, devotion to the Society became a passion.  
This was emphatically true, as might have been expected, of the  
new Society, the Social Union ; and the others, in self-defence,  
if for no other reason, could not lag far behind. All the Socie-  
ties reaped the incidental benefit. This was undoubtedly, as we  
have elsewhere styled it, the golden age of the Literary Socie-  
ties. That age lasted until the diminished number of students  
and the increasing and overmastering influence of another class  
of Societies conspired to thin their ranks and weaken their re-  
sources, and at length necessitated or seemed to necessitate the  
reduction of the three Societies into two : thus it passed gradu-  
ally away never again to return.  
 
The rise of the new Greek Letter Fraternities has obscured  
the light and glory of the old Literary Societies in nearly all  
the Colleges. In Yale College, the Linonian and the Brothers  
which, like rival queens, reigned in the hearts of so many gen-  
erations of students, have thus been extinguished. We trust a  
better destiny awaits the Alexandrian and Athenian Societies.  
We cannot but hope, that the Societies will live as long as the  
College itself, and that the names, so happily selected at the  
very beginning, and hallowed already in the memories and the  
affections of the larger part of the Alumni for half a century,  
may only grow brighter with the lapse of time through genera-  
tions and ages yet to come.  
 
The Society of Inquiry has existed, with unchanged organi-  
zation, and with only unimportant changes of name, longer than  
any other Society in Amherst College. Beginning with the  
opening term of the College itself, it counts in the roll of its  
members the leading ministers and missionaries of all the classes.  
By its regular meetings and discussions, by its correspondence  
 
 
 
SOCIETIES. 631  
 
with missionaries in foreign lands, by its care of the Missionary  
Concert and of the religious state and statistics of the College,  
and more than all perhaps by its almost uninterrupted succession  
of annual addresses from distinguished orators and divines for  
half a century, it has exerted an important Christian influence  
and deserves to be reckoned among the most sacred and vener-  
able names in our history.  
 
Another " clarum et venerabile nomen" in the early history  
of Amherst was the Lutheran Society, an association for the  
cultivation of sacred music, much cherished by the students,  
and not less fostered by the Faculty, which was only revived,  
or reorganized, under another name, in the Beethoven Society.  
 
Next to the anti-slavery excitement, perhaps no question so  
agitated several successive generations of students as that in  
dispute between the secret and anti-secret Societies. We cannot  
go into the history. It has come up incidentally in former chap-  
ters. Dr. Hitchcock has well described the causes of the ex-  
citement, its effects on the College and the action of the Faculty  
in regard to it. 
[Reminiscences, pp. 320-6.]
The excitement has now nearly, if not quite  
passed away. Perhaps the greatest evil now connected with  
these Societies is the expense which they involve. They are  
also peculiarly exposed to the temptation to conviviality which  
so easily besets the young men of these days, although it is be-  
lieved that the secret Societies of Amherst are less convivial and  
more literary than they are in most of the Colleges.  
 
Amherst has been fruitful in Societies of every name and kind,  
too various to be described in these pages, and almost too many  
to be numbered. Those of our readers who would gratify their  
curiosity or refresh their memory in regard to them, will find  
much in which they will be interested in the racy and spicy little  
volume, entitled "Student Life in Amherst," which Mr. George  
R. Cutting of '71, gave to the Alumni public at the Semi-Centen-  
nial Jubilee. Mr. Cutting has searched records, newspapers and  
original sources of every kind with praiseworthy diligence, and  
brought out a mass of curious and entertaining matter, at which  
I have sometimes been surprised, and which I have not hesi-  
tated to use when it has suited my purpose, for I helped him in  
 
 
 
 
632  HISTORY OF AMHERST COLLEGE.  
 
 
 
his work with the distinct understanding that I should be at  
liberty thus to use him in mine. In default of space for any  
detailed history of Amherst Societies, I subjoin a list of the prin-  
cipal names and dates, not doubting that the bare names will be  
the key-notes to whole strains of various music in the memories  
of my readers. The list marks the beginning and the end of  
each Society, as the accessus and the exitus of College officers  
are marked in the triennials. The Societies are arranged chro-  
nologically but in groups according to their kinds.   
 
[Table: Society_Timeline, Page 632]
 
There was an Alumni Association prior to 1842. But it con-  
sisted only of the better scholars elected from the graduates,  
and was of short duration. The present Society of Alumni em-  
braces all graduates of Amherst without distinction. Prof. B.  
B. Edwards was its father, its first President, and its first Ora-  
tor elect, although the pressure of other duties prevented his  
performing this last office. Rev. Theophilus Packard, Jr., was  
President of the Society from 1844 to 1851, and Prof. Joseph  
Haven from 1851 to 1858. Since then " one term," and that  
 
[Uncited footnote 2: Originally called " Theological Society," and now " Hitchcock Society of Inquiry."]

[Uncited footnote 3: A Missionary Society, see p. 276.]
 
 
 
SOCIETY OF ALUMNI. 633  
 
for one year, has become the rule, and the succession of Presidents  
has been as follows: Hon. Henry Morris in 1858; Hon. Simeon  
Nash,. 1859 ; Hon. Horace Maynard, 1860 ; Rev. Jonathan Brace,  
D. D., 1861; Hon. A. H. Bullock, 1862; Hon. James Hum-  
phrey, 1863; Hon. G. A. Grow, 1864; Hon. E. H. Kellogg,  
1865 ; H. G. DeForest, Esq., 1866 ; Rev. D. W. Poor, D. D.,  
1867 ; Hon. Whiting Griswold, 1868 ; Rev. E. K. Alden, D. D.,  
1869 ; Hon. A. B. Ely, 1870 ; Hon. A. H. Bullock, 1871 ; Rev.  
H. M. Storrs, D. D., 1872.  
 
Prof. Snell was Secretary and Treasurer of the Society from  
1842 till 1851 ; Prof. Adams, the next two years, that is, till his  
death in 1852 ; Prof. Clark, from 1853 till 1858 ; and Prof.  
Seelye from that date till the present time. For many years it  
was customary to elect each year an Orator and substitute for  
the ensuing year. More frequently than otherwise, however,  
both Orator and substitute failed. The names of those who ful-  
filled their appointments will be found with others in the list  
of Commencement Orators on a subsequent page. Hon. A. H.  
Bullock who was President for 1852, made an address on retir-  
ing from the chair in 1863, which was so much more satisfactory  
than the customary oration, that it established a precedent or  
new custom which has since been followed greatly to the satis-  
faction of the Alumni. Obituary notices of deceased Alumni  
began to be read before the Society in 1851 by Prof. Tyler who  
then gave biographical sketches of all who had deceased during  
the three years since the last triennial, and continued to read  
such sketches annually till 1858 when he resigned this duty  
into the hands of the Librarian, Mr. L. M. Boltwood, who dis-  
charged it till his resignation of the office of Librarian in 1863.  
Since that time Prof. Crowell has prepared the obituaries ; and  
instead of being read to the Society, they have been printed  
and distributed among the members. The Alumni early pro-  
vided for the preservation of the obituaries that were not printed,  
also, by directing the Secretary to have them carefully copied  
in a book which is now kept in the Library.  
 
For many years, the time of the Alumni at their annual meet-  
ings was chiefly taken up with matters of business, and those very  
frequently efforts to raise money. Thus the records of several  
 
 
 
634 HISTORY OF AMHERST COLLEGE.  
 
meetings are chiefly occupied with resolutions, contributions and  
names of contributors to the portraits successively of President  
Humphrey, Prof. Fiske, and President Hitchcock. These efforts  
were entirely successful ; and when Alumni visit the Library and  
see there the portraits of these officers, they have the satisfac-  
tion of feeling that they were placed there by voluntary contri-  
butions, generally of one dollar each, by the Alumni themselves.  
At their first meeting, in compliance with a suggestion of Dr.  
Vaill, the Society inaugurated an effort to endow an Alumni  
Professorship. This was followed, at intervals, by successive  
efforts to raise fifteen thousand dollars for the Library ; to e^ct  
a monument, a hall or some, other memorial of our fallen sol-  
diers ; and to establish class-scholarships, one at least for each  
class that graduated previous to the semi-centennial. The first  
of these enterprises was an entire failure so far as a complete  
endowment of an Alumni Professorship was concerned, although  
it doubtless contributed to the success of the General Agent in  
his general agency. The second, originating in a donation of a  
thousand dollars by Rev. Dr. George C. Shepard of the Class  
of '24, failed to raise the amount contemplated, but brought  
considerable sums into the treasury of the Society which were  
expended by a Committee of the Alumni and made valuable  
additions to the Library. The third, as already stated in a  
former chapter, has not yet reached its consummation, and it is  
too early to say how far it will prove successful. It is now the  
aim and endeavor of the officers of the Society to keep its meet-  
ings free from such appeals for money and all mere matters of  
business, and consecrate the hour to fraternal greetings, College  
memories and wise counsels for the prosperity of Alma Mater ;  
and the meetings ha*ve been pleasant and profitable just in pro-  
portion as they have been able to adhere to this policy.  
 
COLLEGE MAGAZINES AND NEWSPAPERS.  
 
The first periodical ever printed in Amherst was The Chemist  
and Meteorological Journal, "published every Saturday morning,  
John R. Cotting, editor ; printed by Carter & Adams." As the  
name imports, it was wholly a scientific journal, without any  
department for news. Its editor lectured meanwhile on Chem-  
 
 
 
NEWSPAPERS AND MAGAZINES. 635  
 
istry in Amherst College, but with so little success that his  
name appears on no Catalogue. The first number of The Chem-  
ist appeared in July, 1826, and the last in December of the same  
year. Thus the paper lasted only six months, but quite long  
enough for the pecuniary profit of the printers who lost in it  
about all they were then worth. At the time of his death in  
1871, Mr. Getting was the State Geologist of Georgia.  
 
In November, 1826, the first number of The New England In-  
quirer was issued, by the same printers and publishers, and  
edited by Osmyn Baker, since well known as a member of Con-  
gress and Commissioner of the Smith Charities. Mr. Baker,  
who was a native of Amherst and then a lawyer in town, edited  
only one volume. The second volume was edited by Tutor B.  
B. Edwards and Prof. S. M. Worcester, and printed and pub-  
lished by J. S. & C. Adams a firm known to all the graduates  
of Amherst from that day to this. The paper was conducted  
with great ability by the editors and much enterprise by the  
publishers, but was not a pecuniary success, and at the end  
of the second year, in November, 1827, editors and publishers  
were fain to relinquish it. Sixteen years elapsed, before any  
one ventured to undertake another newspaper in Amherst. In  
1844, the Messrs. Adams commenced the publication of The  
Hampshire and Franklin Express which, although now under  
another name, has been continued till the present time.  
 
The periodical literature of Amherst under-graduates com-  
menced in 1831 with The Sprite, which was a magazine, pub-  
lished, somewhat irregularly, about once in two months, and  
filled with Sprite-\y tales, romances and productions of the  
fancy and the imagination. The present periodical, The Am-  
herst Student, is a neivspaper, published fortnightly, in term  
time, and made up in about equal proportions of the facts  
and events of every day occurrence in this and other Colleges,  
and criticisms of the government and the course of study, in-  
tended to show what in the opinion of the editors, a College  
might be and ought to be, but is not, in this nineteenth cen-  
tury. A difference sufficiently indicative of change and prog-  
ress to satisfy the radical reformer, and truly indicative, in part  
at least, of a change that has really come over College minds in  
 
 
 
636 HISTORY OF AMHERST COLLEGE.  
 
this democratic and matter-of-fact age. The students of the  
present day would not cure to read the fine-spun fancies of The  
Sprite, and the editors of The Sprite would neither have conde-  
scended to print the plain facts, nor have been permitted by the  
Faculty to publish the bold criticisms which fill the pages of The  
Student. The periodicals that fill up the interval between these  
two extremes The Shrine, The G-uest, The Horce Collegiance,  
The Indicator, The Amherst Collegiate Magazine, and The Ichnolite  
were all monthlies, and as in the frequency of their issue, so in  
their character, they were somewhat intermediate between The  
Sprite and The Student, each reflecting more or less the spiri^of  
its age and generation, all marking the changes through which the  
College was passing, and yet each and all shaped quite as much by  
the idiosyncrasies of the individual students who originated them  
or conducted them from year to year. Perhaps the chief interest  
now in looking over these old periodicals is in noting the names  
of the editors and contributors. 
[The contributors are anonymous, but the Librarian has entered the names of  
very many in the copies preserved in the College Library.]
Among them are not a few of  
the most honored names in the Catalogue of our Alumni. And  
yet when the editors are obliged to be almost the sole contribu-  
tors, as it is said they now are, they pay dearly for their honors.  
It is too heavy a tax on their time and strength. We subjoin in  
chronological table the entire series of College periodicals :  
 
[Table: College_Periodicals, Page 636]  
 
COMMENCEMENT, CLASS-DAY, ETC.  
 
It is well known to our readers that formerly Commencement  
was a holiday, and a high-day, not only for the students and  
 
 
 
COMMENCEMENT. 637  
 
their friends, and the Alumni of this and other Colleges, but for  
the uneducated masses not of Amherst merely but of Pelham,  
Shutesbury and all the neighboring towns, some of whom filled  
the village church with a rush and a jam, while the greater  
multitude thronged the streets, clustered about the booths and  
stalls on the common, saw the shows -in the tents, listened to  
the auctioneers, criers and street orators, or perchance, with  
more aspiring mind, visited the public rooms and took in the  
view from the tower. Now the spectacles and the spectators  
have disappeared together from the common, the rush at the  
doors has ceased, and the seats are no longer crowded with cul-  
tivated or uncultivated hearers. This change began with the  
change in the time of Commencement, which used to be in Au-  
gust, or September, when the rural population had finished the  
hard work of the Summer and were now ready for a holiday.  
Now Commencement comes early in July, and the farmers are in  
the midst of their haying and harvesting. But a similar, not to  
say a greater change is seen in the Commencements at Cambridge  
and Yale and all the other Colleges, and cannot, therefore, be  
owing to any mere local or temporary cause. Ordinations also  
and conventions, and public occasions generally, no longer draw  
such crowds as they did a few years ago. The change is espe-  
cially manifest since the war. Possibly the fearful anxiety and  
agony of that great conflict may have rendered the popular mind  
less susceptible to minor excitements. But the revolution of  
which we speak, is doubtless mainly the result of the widening  
circulation and growing influence of the newspaper press. Peo-  
ple will not take great pains to attend any ordinary public gather-  
ing when they can read all that was said and done in the daily  
newspaper the next morning. As, in ancient times, poetry gave  
place to prose when alphabetic writing came into common use, so  
oral speech is now waning before written hearing before read-  
ing under the influence of the magazine and the daily newspa-  
per. The next step in the revolution that is now sweeping over  
our American system of collegiate education a step which has  
been distinctly announced by the oldest of our New England  
Colleges, and is seriously contemplated in more than one College  
out of New England will perhaps be to abolish Commencement  
 
 
 
638 HISTORY OF AMHERST COLLEGE.  
 
itself, or at least all that has come down to us from our fathers,  
associated with that venerable name. Amherst College, we hope  
and believe, will not be in haste to follow such an example.  
 
One of the most attractive and inspiring exercises of Com-  
mencement week has been the annual Oration, or Address, be-  
fore one and another of the College Societies. This usage in  
Amherst began almost, or quite, with the beginning of such  
societies, and grew with their growth, until it became a promi-  
nent feature of our anniversaries. The Society of Inquiry has  
rarely failed to be thus represented annually, and that too by  
some of our most learned and eloquent divines. The Literary  
Societies have sometimes, (in the days of their early rivalry, )"iiad  
two or three rival orators at Commencement, and sometimes,  
(especially of late,) had none at all. Usually, however, they  
have appeared before the public with one orator each year,  
either chosen by the Societies in rotation, or in their united ca-  
pacity as a Social Union. Not a few of the foremost orators and  
statesmen of the country have been proud to present themselves  
at these our Olympic games where educated men and cultured  
and refined women gathered in crowds to listen to their orations,  
and where large classes of noble and aspiring youth were, stirred  
to emulate their wisdom and eloquence, as Thucydides was ani-  
mated by the rehearsals of Herodotus, as Demosthenes was in-  
spired by the eloquence of Callistratus, as Themistocles was  
moved by the laurels of Miltiades. For several years the Society  
of Alumni, also, brought forward the distinguished sons of the  
College in set speeches to instruct and encourage their younger  
brothers in the race of life ; and at irregular intervals the Phi  
Beta Kappa Society has been fitly represented by some of the  
ripest of our American scholars. Some of these orations still  
ring in my ears like the distant sound of a trumpet. The very  
names of the orators waken memories like Auld Lang Syne.  
The list which lies before me, and which I have taken some  
pains to collect, though long, is so suggestive that I cannot but  
put it on record. Making no distinction as to the society before  
which they spoke, the roll is as follows: 
[I have not been able to make the list complete for the earlier years. The speak-  
ers are arranged in the order of the years when they spoke, beginning with 1828.]
William B. Calhoun,  
 
 
 
COMMENCEMENT ORATORS. 639  
 
John Todd, George Bancroft, G. C. Verplanck, Caleb Gushing,  
Albert Barnes, D. D. Barnard, George Shepard, Gov. McDow-  
ell, of Virginia, Gov. Seward, of New York, Gov. Everett, of  
Massachusetts, Alexander Everett, B. B. Edwards, Robert E.  
Pattison, George Lunt, Thatcher Thayer, Edward Beecher,  
Leonard Bacon, Charles Simmer, William Adams, Rufus Choate,  
Jonathan Leavitt, Tayler Lewis, James S. Thayer, E. P. Whip-  
pie, J. B. Condit, W. G. T. Shedd, H. W. Beecher, Alvan Bond,  
R. S. Storrs, A. H. Bullock, H. B. Smith, E. A. Park, Nehemiah  
Cleaveland, Henry Neill, A. L. Stone, C. C. Felton, A. W. Mc-  
Clure, R. W. Emerson, F. D. Huntington, J. P. Thompson,  
Joseph Haven, R. D. Hitchcock, Anson Burlingame,G. A. Grow,  
E. B. Foster, Wendell Phillips, Nehemiah Adams, Austin Phelps,  
George W. Curtis, Samuel Seelye, Barnas Sears, Horace May-  
nard, F. A. March, Daniel S. 'Dickinson, J. M. Manning, O. P.  
Lord, J. E. Rockwell, L. P. Hickok, George Thompson, G. S.  
Hillard, James McCosh, George P. Loring, A. P. Peabody, J.  
L. Diman, J. H. Fairchild, G. N. Webber, N. Mighill, W. Glad-  
den. Some of these speakers as, for example, Messrs. Beecher,  
Hitchcock, Huntington and Storrs have spoken two or three  
times, and before different societies. To complete the variety,  
John B. Gough addressed the Anti-Venenian Society, or the stu-  
dents as a body, beginning some twenty years ago, at almost  
every successive Commencement for ten years. The educating  
power and stimulating influence of one or two, sometimes three  
or four such orators as these at every Commencement, can hardly  
be overestimated. To lose it were a great loss to the students, to  
the College and to the community. Yet the same causes which  
have already so reduced the attendance at Commencements,  
must, of course, dimmish the inducement and the inclination to  
address the Societies on these occasions. There is an increasing-  
difficulty every year in obtaining such orators, as once deemed  
it an honor and a privilege to appear before the audience that  
was wont to gather at these annual festivals. And what is still  
more discouraging, it is only an orator of the very highest repu-  
tation, or more likely some speaker who will amuse them and  
make them laugh, that now draws any considerable number of  
the students themselves, even the members of the Society that  
 
 
 
640 HISTORY OF AMHERST COLLEGE.  
 
invited him, to listen to his oration. And he goes away per-  
chance exclaiming, with the prince of Roman orators, O tempo-  
ra ! O mores ! At this rate, this truly American feature of a  
distinctively American Commencement will soon die out, even  
before the Commencement itself ceases to drag out a miserable  
existence.  
 
Class-day has recently become a prominent and highly attrac-  
tive feature of Commencement week. It began with the Class  
of 1852 who, at the close of their Senior examination, six weeks  
before Commencement, had an Oration and a Poem in the even-  
ing, after which they marched in procession, led by a band of  
music and followed by all College and no small part of the toVn,  
particularly the town boys, to the houses of the Professors whom  
they addressed, through some one appointed for the purpose,  
and expected them, volentes nolentes, to make a speech in return.  
Then they had a class-supper, which, however, was over, and  
the class at their rooms and in their beds long before morning.  
Class-day continued to be observed at the beginning of the  
Senior vacation, (growing, however, in the number, variety and  
interest of the exercises, occupying the afternoon, instead of the  
evening, with its public performances and prolonging the class  
supper to day-dawn the next morning,) until 1870, when it was  
transferred to the week of Commencement, thus suiting the con-  
venience of the relatives and friends of the class who can now  
combine Class day and Commencement in one festival, and at  
the same time contributing a charm to the exercises of that  
week which compensates in no small measure for the loss of  
other attractions.  
 
A noteworthy change has passed over Amherst, in common  
with other Colleges and the community generally, in manners  
and customs, and especially in regard to recreations and amuse-  
ments. Time was, when class-suppers and " convivial enter-  
tainments " were " strictly forbidden " when slave-holding was  
deemed comparatively innocent, and dancing a mortal sin  
when the ten-pin alley was the broad road to ruin, and the bil-  
liard saloon the very vestibule of perdition when the student  
who should have been caught singing such songs as " The way  
we have in Old Amherst," and others like it, in the streets,.  
 
 
 
CHANGE OF CUSTOMS. 641  
 
would have been expelled, or perchance found himself in the  
lock-up. Now the class-supper is the goal and garland of the  
College curriculum. Now slave-holding is abolished, and danc-  
ing, like calisthenics, is very generally considered as in itself an  
innocent recreation, nay, at proper times and places a graceful  
and useful exercise. Now the bowling-alley occupies the lower  
floor of the College Gymnasium, and but for want of room and  
money it is quite possible that a billiard table might have been  
introduced under the same roof, and as a part of the same sys-  
tem of gymnastic exercises. Now those songs which are such a  
strange medley of festive odes and negro melodies, are sung in  
the parlors of citizens and Professors. I cannot say that I am  
entirely converted either to the ethics or the aesthetics of this  
new regime. Still less would I affirm, that negro melodies,  
smoking songs, class-suppers, dancing, bowling, billiards et id  
genus omne, have been wholly converted and entirely sanctified  
to the uses of learning and religion. Nor should it be under-  
stood that all these innovations have received the sanction of the  
government, or met the approval of the Faculty and the Trus-  
tees. But I do say as John Wesley said long ago, that it is a  
pity the devil should have all the best music, or the best exer-  
cise, recreation and amusement. And we have certainly gone  
far in redeeming not a few of these things from their long  
desecration, and making them among the most effective means  
of bodily and spiritual health, of physical and mental education.  
Ten-pins and billiards were the way to perdition, when they  
were to be found only with the bar and the saloon in the very  
purlieus of the pit, and when the young man rushed madly into  
them in opposition to public sentiment, the commands and ex-  
postulations of parents and teachers and the remonstrances of  
his own conscience. But students are far less likely, as facts  
abundantly prove, to visit drinking and gambling saloons and  
the like dens of corruption and pollution, when they can find  
the exercise and recreation which they seek, without such sur-  
roundings. And when we compare all these new modes which  
distinguish, but in the view of older graduates do not adorn,  
recent College life, with those which they have superseded  
with the hazing, the fagging, the breaking of windows, the tar-  
 
 
 
642 HISTORY OF AMHERST COLLEGE.  
 
ring or freezing up of the bell, the turning of recitation-rooms  
into sheep-pens or cow-stables, and above all with the mock  
sacraments and prayer-meetings, the " Ho every one that thirst-  
eth " societies, and the secret orgies which, thirty or forty years  
ago, were, too often, the reaction and outbreak from old ideas  
and ordinances, but which no student now-a-days would ever  
think of perpetrating certainly we cannot deny that, on the  
whole, there has been a gain to manners, morals and religion.  
When I see the follies and frivolities of students now, I confess  
I have sometimes been almost ready to say, that they have de-  
generated since I was in College. Yet on reflection I come back  
to the conclusion that the difference is chiefly in forms* and  
modes of manifestation, that human nature and student nature  
is substantially the same in all generations, and that the students  
of Amherst College were never more manly, more scholarly or  
more Christian, than they are now. Certain I am that the Presi-  
dent and Professors were never so much in the habit of relying  
on their sense of honor and right, and never before was there  
such a prompt and unfailing response by the whole body of the  
students to all our appeals in behalf of whatever things are true,  
pure, beautiful and good.  
 
Boating is a new custom in Amherst, and a strange one, which  
former generations of students would never have imagined  
could be introduced, and in which the students of other Colleges  
had no fear of competition from this quarter. " A fresh-wa-  
ter College," with the river three miles away, its students,  
for the most part, " landlubbers," and its Faculty, partly for  
these reasons, and partly on general grounds, averse to the ex-  
periment, it never entered the lists till 1869 and then at great  
disadvantage. Yet at the third trial in the regatta of 1872  
the Amherst boys came off victorious over all competitors, and  
made the shortest time on record. The result was a surprise to  
themselves and an astonishment to others. Whether it was  
owing to the greater average age of Amherst students as The  
Yale Courant suggests, to the long and constant practice of the  
Gymnasium as the newspapers very generally argue, to better  
training, that is, neither over-training, on the one hand, nor, on  
the other, neglect of training as the boys themselves say, or, as  
 
 
 
BOATING. 643  
 
their trainer is said to insist, to their morale quite as much and  
more than to any physical causes this question is still sub ju-  
dice, and we shall not attempt to decide it. One thing is quite  
certain. If they would maintain their superiority, they must  
not overlook any of these means, least of all that which is em-  
phasized by their trainer. And if, by the happy union of phys-  
ical and moral discipline, they can maintain a well-earned as-  
cendency if they can, at the same time, keep themselves free  
from the betting and drinking and gambling which are now too  
conspicuous features of the regatta, and thus help to purify and  
elevate the regatta itself, they will have deserved well of the  
College and the country, and will win the unanimous suffrages  
of the friends of physical, intellectual and moral education.  
 
After all the changes that have come over it during the half  
century of its existence, the College still answers well the pur-  
pose which was uppermost in the hearts of its founders. Of  
the whole number of Alumni whose names are registered in the  
Semi-Centennial Catalogue, viz., nineteen hundred and forty-  
six, seven hundred and ninety-nine, or forty-one per cent of  
the whole, are registered as ministers. The percentage will, of  
course be greater when all the candidates for the ministry in  
the recently-graduated classes, have entered the profession. At  
the close of Dr. Humphrey's presidency, of seven hundred and  
ninety-eight, then the entire number of Alumni, three hundred  
and forty, or forty-two per cent, had become ministers ; and at  
the close of Dr. Hitchcock's presidency four hundred and seven-  
ty-nine out of ten hundred and ninety-four, or forty-three per  
cent, had entered the ministry. The classes that graduated un-  
der President Humphrey, taken by themselves, have furnished  
fifty -five per cent of ministers ; those that graduated under Presi-  
dent Hitchcock, forty-three per cent; and the first ten classes  
that graduated under President Stearns, leaving out the later  
ones as not yet having brought in their full quota, forty per cent.  
 
The Class of '24 has the largest proportion of ministers, viz :  
seventy per cent ; the Class of '37 ranks next, having sixty-  
eight per cent, and the Class of '43 follows close upon it, having  
sixty-seven per cent. Amherst has fallen off in common with  
all the other New England Colleges, in the proportion of minis-  
 
 
 
644 HISTORY OF AMHERST COLLEGE.  
 
ters to the whole number of graduates. But it has fallen off  
less than any other New England College ; and is now furnish-  
ing not only a larger percentage, but a greater number of min-  
isters than any other College in New England. Indeed, for the  
half century, beginning with 1815 and ending with 1865, " Am-  
herst stands at the head in its percentage of ministers ; and in  
the number of ministers which it has furnished during this  
period, it is second only to Yale." 
[Rev. C. Gushing. See Exercises at the Placing of the Corner-stone of the Col-  
lege Church.]
 
The occupations of our Alumni as they are registered in the  
Semi-Centennial Catalogue, prepared with great care and labor  
by Prof. Crowell, are summed up as follows :  
 
[Table: Alumni_Occupation, Page 644]
 
This gives forty-one per cent of all our graduates as ministers,  
seven per cent, physicians, twelve per cent, lawyers, and eleven  
per cent, teachers. According to recent statistics of the Bureau  
of Education, as reported in the newspapers (I am not able to  
verify the report) amongHhe graduates of "four New England  
Colleges, Harvard, Yale, Dartmouth and Wesleyan, a little more  
than twenty-five per cent are ministers, thirty-three per cent,  
lawyers, thirteen per cent, physicians, and fourteen per cent,  
teachers. Yale has one-third of her graduates in the law and  
less than one-quarter in the ministry ; forty per cent of Har-  
vard men choose law."  
 
The above table of Amherst statistics, it should be added, ex-  
hibits the entire number of ordained ministers and doctors of  
medicine, since they have always been distinguished on the Tri-  
ennial Catalogue, while the other occupations which are regis-  
tered for the first time in the Semi-Centennial Catalogue, are  
designated only in cases of living Alumni, so that it does not  
 
 
 
PROFESSIONS. 645  
 
show the entire number of lawyers, teachers or other literary  
men, nor their full proportion to ministers and physicians. At  
the same time the proportion of lawyers and of lay graduates  
generally, was comparatively small in the earlier years of the  
College. It used to be regarded almost as a matter of course  
that a pious student in Amherst College ought to be, and would  
be, a minister. Now pious students go into all the professions,  
and it is considered desirable it certainly is desirable that they  
should ; if they .only carry their Christian principles with them  
into the secular professions and the high places of influence in  
the State as well as the Church, as we know very many of them  
do, it is a result which would gladden the hearts even of those  
good men who founded the Institution in prayer and faith chiefly  
for the education of ministers.  
 
The Alumni of Amherst adorn every profession. The reverend  
clergy outnumber, and, on the whole, perhaps outshine, the other  
professions. But our young lawyers and physicians are rapidly  
rising to the same high rank in New York and Boston and else-  
where which our preachers have so long and so conspicuously  
held in Brooklyn and more recently taken in other cities. Lit-  
erature, also, and science, and theology, count Amherst gradu-  
ates among their brightest ornaments. They have carried their  
knowledge and culture with them into the high places of agri-  
culture and manufactures, engineering and machinery, commerce  
and business of every kind. The periodical press owns their  
sway from Andover to San Francisco, in the Valley of the Con-  
necticut, on the banks of the Hudson, and on the waters that  
flow into the Mississippi. Next to religion, education is perhaps  
the sphere in which our College has especially ruled, and her sons  
are to be found at the head of Academies and High Schools  
without number, from the farthest East to the far West, and of-  
ficering Colleges from the Massachusetts Agricultural College in  
Amherst to the Syrian College in Beirut and Robert College in  
Constantinople ; from the oldest Theological Seminaries in this  
country to the most recent schools for the education of native  
preachers and teachers in Turkey, India, China and Japan. They  
have not often sought distinction in political and public life, but  
promotion has sometimes sought them, and they have honored  
 
 
 
646 HISTORY OF AMHERST COLLEGE.  
 
the Gubernatorial office in Massachusetts and the Speaker's chair  
in the Congress of the United States; they have filled and illus-  
trated some of the highest stations legislative, executive and ju-  
dicial in the State and the Nation. Amherst can not boast of  
the long line of Presidents, Governors and Cabinet Officers and  
Ambassadors to foreign courts that have marched down the gen-  
erations and centuries in the history of older Institutions. But  
as ambassadors of the King of Kings, as heralds of the Prince  
of Peace, as leaders of the sacramental host and pioneers of  
Christian civilization, the sons of Amherst may be seen to-day  
in every land advancing to the conquest of the world for Christ  
and establishing his reign in the hearts of men. Wherever there  
is any great battle to be fought, any prolonged and desperate  
war to be waged, any hard work to be done at home or abroad,  
in civilized or savage lands, for truth and justice, for libert} r and  
humanity, for learning and religion there they are sure to be  
found doing the hardest of the work, leading in the hottest of  
the fight, the true working men in the field of the world, brave  
soldiers in the service of the Son of Man and the Son of God.  
Such hitherto has been the history of Amherst College such  
be her fame and glory in all coming ages.  
 
There was a time when too many Amherst Alumni were dis-  
affected, not to say, disloyal to their College. That day has gone  
by, we trust, never to return. The sons of Amherst are now  
proud to call her mother. They gather at the homestead in in-  
creasing numbers and with growing affection at each return  
of her anniversary festival. They have organized Societies of  
Alumni in the principal cities of. the East and the West live So-  
cieties that meet every winter, and over a good supper, talk of the  
past, the present and the future of the College. They advise  
students to go to Amherst and send their own sons there un-  
less there are good and sufficient reasons for sending them else-  
where. They advocate the claims of their Alma in the newspa-  
pers and plead her cause in the Legislature. The greater part  
of the Trustees all the recently elected Trustees, with a single  
exception are now graduates; and as soon as the law passed at  
the last session of the Legislature, conditioned however on its  
acceptance by the Corporation and the Alumni Association, can  
 
 
 
THE FUTURE. 647  
 
receive certain amendments in which both these bodies are  
agreed, five members of the Corporation will hereafter forever  
be elected directly by the Alumni at their annual meeting. Al-  
ready the College is substantially controlled and governed by its  
graduates ; in future it will be more and more what they choose  
to make it; and with their wealth and influence increasing as  
they increase in number and in devotion to its interests, and  
with the blessing of heaven on the wise counsels of its guardi-  
ans and the faithful labors of its officers, it enters upon the sec-  
ond half-century of its existence with abundant promise of a  
prosperity and usefulness exceeding the most sanguine hopes of  
its most hopeful and aspiring founders. At the close of the first  
century may those who write its history, find this promise and  
prophecy more than fulfilled.  
