CHAPTER XXIII.  
 
THE PRESENT TRUSTEES.  
 
SEVERAL of the Trustees who now compose the Corporation,  
have been among the most faithful friends and the most selfsacrificiiig servants of the College from very early times, and  
are not less worthy of a place in its history than those who have  
deceased or resigned their charge. At the same time, their ser-  
vices are better known to the writer of these pages, and the  
chief events of their lives can be easier ascertained by him than  
they can by the historian of the next half century. I shall,  
therefore, set down the leading facts in the lives of the present  
Trustees, at the hazard it may be of transcending somewhat the  
proper province of history, but not, I trust, of the expense of  
its truth and impartiality.  
 
Dr. Ebenezer Alden is now the oldest member of the Board,  
having been elected in the place of S. V. S. Wilder, Esq., in  
1841, and therefore having now been a Trustee over thirty  
years, thus ranking next to Dr. Vaill and Mr. Calhoun in the  
length of time during which he has held the trust. He was  
born in the South Precinct of Braintree, now Randolph, March  
17, 1788. Both on his father's and his mother's side, he is a  
lineal descendant [Of the seventh generation on his father's side.] 
of John Alden, the Pilgrim, and the last male survivor of the Mayflower. 
His father was a highly respected physician in Randolph. All his immediate 
ancestors, paternal and maternal, were Congregationalists and members  
of Congregational Churches, so that, as he playfully remarks,  
if he, " also a Congregationalist, is a little persistent in his attachment to old forms of faith and worship, it need occasion no  
 
surprise." Having prepared for College under the instruction  
of his pastor, Rev. Jonathan Strong, D. D., he entered Harvard  
College in 1804, and graduated with honor in 1808. In his  
Senior year, he attended the medical lectures given at the College by Doctors Waterhouse, Dexter and John Warren. On  
the Monday succeeding his graduation in July, 1808, he left his  
home for Hanover, N. H , where he arrived after a hard ride of  
three days on horseback, and placed himself under the instruction of Nathan Smith, M. D., then enjoying a high reputation  
as a surgeon and a teacher, which he maintained through life.  
 
At Hanover, Dr. Alden first became acquainted with Col. Rufus Graves, " who, perhaps, as truly as any other man, is entitled  
to the appellation of father of Amherst College."  
 
" Col. Graves was visionary, no doubt," continues Dr. Alden,  
" but he was unselfish in his aims, an ardent lover of liberty and  
a sincere Christian, and who will say that his anticipations in  
regard to the prosperity and usefulness of Amherst College  
have not been more than realized ? If such have been the first-fruits in the first half-century, what, at its close, will be the  
ripened harvest ? "  
 
