APPENDIX,


A.

NAMES, RESIDENCE AND AMOUNT OF THE ORIGINAL SUBSCRIPTION
TO THE CHARITY FUND OF AMHERST COLLEGE,
Table: Donors AppA, Page 649 first page
Table: Donors AppA, Page 649 second page
Table: Donors AppA, Page 649 third page
Table: Donors AppA, Page 649 fourth page
Table: Donors AppA, Page 649 fifth page
Table: Donors AppA, Page 649 GUARANTY BOND

Signed by the above nine citizens of Amherst, binding themselves jointly and severally
to the payment of the above sum of fifteen thousand dollars in order to make
up the full amount of fifty thousand dollars. See page 145 of the History :

KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that we, David Parsons, clerk, Jarib White,
gentleman, Calvin Merrill, gentleman, Enos Baker, gentleman, John Leland, jun.,
Esq., Samuel Fowler Dickinson, Esq., Elijah Boltwood, innholder, Hezekiah Wright
Strong, Esq., and Joseph Church, jun., husbandman

Are holden and stand firmly bound and obliged unto the Trustees of Amherst
Academy in the full sum of fifteen thousand dollars, to be paid to the said Trustees,
their successors and assigns ; to which payment well and truly to be made, we
jointly and severally bind ourselves, our heirs, assigns, executors and administrators,
firmly by these presents, sealed with our seals and dated this sixth day of
July in the year of our Lord eighteen hundred and eighteen.

The condition of this obligation is, that if the obligees in this instrument, their
heirs, executors, or administrators, shall, within two years from this date, procure
to be subscribed and secured to the Charitable Fund about to be established in
Amherst, the Constitution of which was approved by the Convention holden at
Amherst, on the twenty-eighth day of September last, the sum of fifteen thousand
dollars, as part of the permanent fund of fifty thousand dollars of said Institution,
according to the Constitution thereof and in fulfillment of their subscription of the
same sum to said Constitution made previous to the twenty-third day of May last ;
then this instrument to be void ; otherwise to remain in force.

Signed, sealed and delivered in presence of { DAVID PARSONS, JOHN LELAND,
CALVIN MERRILL, JARIB WHITE, H. WRIGHT STRONG, SAMUEL F. DICKINSON,
JOSEPH CHURCH, JUN.}

A true copy Attest, 	R. GRAVES, Financier.
Table: Bond List, Page 655 first page
Table: Bond List, Page 655 second page
B.  SUBSCRIPTION FOR THE COLLEGIATE CHARITY INSTITUTION IN  AMHERST, MASS.

[COMMONLY CALLED THE THIRTY THOUSAND DOLLAR SUBSCRIPTION.]

JUNE 28, 1822.

Whereas a subscription to the amount of fifty thousand dollars has been obtained
for the establishment of a permanent fund to be used in the education of pious and
indigent young men at a Collegiate Charity Institution in Amherst; and,

Whereas the Trustees of Amherst Academy who are entrusted with the management
of this fund, have by the aid of other subscriptions and contributions, erected
a building for the use of said Institution, one hundred feet long and forty feet wide,
containing thirty-two rooms for the accommodation of students ; and

Whereas the said Trustees have appointed a President, three Professors and a
Tutor, as instructors in the Institution ; and

Whereas it has been thought expedient to admit into this Institution, not only
Charity students but others also who are qualified to enter College, and are able to
pay a reasonable compensation for tuition and room-rent ; and

Whereas the present building is already filled with students about half of whom
are supported in part by Charity ; and

Whereas to accommodate an increasing number of students, and to give the Institution
such permanency and respectability that it may rank with the first Colleges
of New England, it is necessary that additional buildings be erected, and a more
extensive library and apparatus be provided, and such a fund raised that the interest
of it may, in part, defray the expense of instructors ; and

Whereas this Institution is located in a part of Massachusetts where living is
cheap where the climate is healthy where the surrounding country is delightful as
well as fertile and where the good moral character of students is likely to be secure :

Now, therefore, we, the undersigned, do hereby severally promise to pay to the
said Trustees, or to any agent duly commissioned by them or to their order, the
sum affixed to our respective names, annually for five years from the date, on demand,
to be held or appropriated by the said Trustees for the use of said Collegiate
Charity Institution.

Provided, nevertheless, that no person shall be bound to pay any part of this subscription,
unless the amount hereafter subscribed for the same purpose shall, within
one year from the date, exceed thirty thousand dollars.

Desirous of increasing the respectability and usefulness of an Institution which was
founded in Charity and has been manifestly approved and blessed of heaven, and believing
it to be more blessed to give than to receive, and hoping hereby to advance
the honor of our Redeemer and the best interests of man, we cheerfully subscribe.

[Table: Sample_Table, Page 657]
Table: Sample Table, Page 657

The entire subscription is not copied in all these towns. But a fair specimen is
given. In Sherburne, the subscribers seem to have paid in advance and discounted
their own payments. Where the columns are left blank, payment was probably
never made.

COPY OF A LETTER ADDRESSED TO DEACON LELAND, AND PRESERVED
IN THE ABOVE SUBSCRIPTION BOOK.

MARSHFIELD, January 17, 1826.

SIR I send you in behalf of our Mite Society the sum of six dollars, being due
in 1825. May the Lord bless and prosper your Institution is the desire of

SALLY AMES, Secretary.

COPY OF THE OBLIGATION MENTIONED AND DESCRIBED ON PAGE 147.
Whereas there are subscriptions to the thirty thousand dollar fund, so called, of
the Amherst Collegiate Institution, some of which are made by females, and some
by minors, as is supposed, we do hereby, for value received and for the better
securing the payment of said part of said fund, guarantee to the Trustees of the
Amherst Academy for the benefit of said Institution, the payment of all such subscriptions
so made by females and minors, and all other subscriptions to said fund
not exceeding one dollar a year.

J. E. TRASK,

Amherst, October 8, 1824. NATHANIEL SMITH,

Attest, H. W. STRONG. JOHN FISKE.

SPECIMENS OF THE RIDICULE OF THIS SUBSCRIPTION BY THE ENEMIES OF
THE COLLEGE. (SEE PAGE 541.)

"On the [subscription] papers were found thirteen hundred and fifty-three subscribers,
scattered over more than one hundred towns in Massachusetts, Connecticut
and New York. Included in this number were two hundred and six females, mostly
married women and infants! There were many infants not females; how many
was not ascertained. There were five hundred and eighty-four subscriptions of one
dollar each. There were two hundred and three of twenty-five cents each ; fiftyeight
of fifty cents, many of twelve and a half cents, and some ten cents. One of two
cents. All payable annually for five years. Small subscriptions from three female
charitable societies. From two charity boxes. One female Mite Society. These
would seem to be the last gleanings of charity." Extract from a statement of the affairs of
the Amherst Institution on the th of October, 1824, compiled from evidence exhibited to the
Committee of Examination, the pamphlet gotten up by the opposition and placed in
the seats of the Representatives in the final debate on the charter. See pp. 148-9.

When the College petitioned the Legislature for pecuniary aid in 1881, this sub
scription again became a fruitful theme of ridicule and scorn. 1 subjoin a specimen
from the speech of Mr. Fuller of Boston, with the notes by which it was accompanied
in the Appeal by the Trustees to the public. See p. 182.

"The thirty thousand dollar fund stood next in order of the Amherst Collegiate
Institution. That fund was made up in part by a subscription of married women
and minors, which was minus. One-half of it was utterly lost. The Committee
could not find it. Certificates were indeed brought forward declaring that the fund
was entire and clear. But when the Committee came to the investigation, it was
thought best to patch up these subscriptions of women and minors, and a guarantee
was made out that they should be paid. This was done while the Committee
were holding their session in a room of the hotel in Worcester.
["This, though a mistake of no importance in itself, may be taken as a specimen of Mr.
Fuller's accuracy in the greatest charges which he so vehemently reiterates against the College.
The Committee did not sit at Worcester but at Amherst."]
While the Committee
was sitting, some of the Trustees came out into the bar-room and got this
bond of guarantee executed. It was signed by J. E. Minot
["It is not known that any such man as J. E. Minot ever had anything to do with the Institution.
"]
and Nathan Smith.
This Nathan Smith (though he [Mr. Fuller] did not know him and did not wish
to) was found to be so infamous that the Legislature struck his name off from the
list of Trustees.
["'This Nathan Smith 'whom to have known would have been so contaminating to Mr.
Fuller's moral purity is Nathaniel Smith, Esq., of Sunderland, who was for many years a
member of the General Court; whose integrity, during a long life, will not suffer in comparison
with that of any other man in the community ; who has been the munificent patron not
only of the College, but of nearly all the beneficent institutions of the day, and who regardless
of privileged slander is passing the evening of life in the fruition of that benediction, 'It Is
more blessed to give than to receive.' Mr. Fuller forgot to inform the House that this man
who ' was found to be so infamous that the Legislature struck his name off from the list of
Trustees', is now [1832] one of the five Trustees, appointed by joint ballot of the two Houses,
to represent them in the Board and to assist in taking care of the College."]

"The whole subscription was basely got up. The whole of this fifty thousand
dollars was subscribed for the purpose of removing Williams College to Amherst
that was the pretence and the money was given with that design. After it is obtained
for that purpose, what do these Trustees do? He would not say, they exactly
put it in their own pockets but they had a kind of ambition they had rather
be Presidents, Trustees and Professors than to have others imported perhaps they
thought Williams College not hopefully pious enough, and so they made a College
for themselves. As to the original begetting of the College, he would promise to
say nothing about it such things were generally done in secret... If you agree
to give buildings, etc., to all who ask for them, there is scarcely a town in the Commonwealth
that would not want a College; for every town has some inhabitants as
ambitious as the Reverend Heman Humphrey and his associates not that all such
Colleges would be equal to Amherst, for it is said that heaven has protected them
from all evil reports."

C. THE CHARTER.

The passages enclosed in brackets in the following reprint of the Charter were not
in the original bill, but were added by way of amendment. See pp. 152 seqq. of
the History.

AN ACT TO ESTABLISH A COLLEGE IN THE TOWN OF AMHERST.

SECTION 1. Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General Court
assembled, and by the authority of the same, That there be and hereby is incorporated in
the town of Amherst, in the County of Hampshire, a College for the education of
youth ; and that the Rev. Heman Humphrey, D. D., Hon. William Gray, Hon. Marcus
Morton, Rev. Joshua Crosby, Hon. John Hooker, [Rev. Joseph Lyman, D. D.,]
Israel E. Trask, Esq., Rev. Jonathan Going, Elisha Billings, Esq., Rev. James Taylor,
S. V. S. Wilder, Esq., Rev. Joseph Vaill, Hon. Jonathan Leavitt, Rev. Alfred
Ely, Hon. Lewis Strong, [Rev. Francis Wayland, Jr., and Elihu Lyman, Esq.,]
[Instead of the three names enclosed in brackets, the original bill or the printed copy referred
to, p. 152, has the names of Rev. John Fiske, Nathaniel Smith, Esq.. and Rev. Experience
Porter.]
be
and hereby are constituted a body corporate, by the name of the Trustees of
Amherst College; and that they and their successors, and such as shall be duly
elected members of said Corporation, shall be and remain a body corporate by that
name forever. And for the orderly conducting the business of said Corporation,
the said Trustees shall have power and authority, from time to time, as occasion
may require, to elect a President, Vice-President, Secretary and Treasurer, and
such other officers of said Corporation as may be found necessary, and to declare
the duties and tenures of their respective offices, and also to remove any Trustee
from the same Corporation when, in their judgment, he shall be rendered incapable
by age or otherwise, of discharging the duties of his office, or shall neglect or refuse
to perform the same, and also from time to time to elect new members of the
said Corporation ; Provided, nevertheless, That the number of members (including
the President of said College, for the time being, who shall ex-officio, be one
of said Corporation) shall never be greater than seventeen,
[The original bill adds, nor " remain less than eleven."]
[and that the five
vacancies which shall first happen in the Board of Trustees, shall be filled as they
occur, by the joint ballot of the Legislature in convention of both Houses ; and
whenever any person so drawn by the Legislature to fill such vacancy, or his successor,
shall cease to be a member of the Corporation, his place shall be filled in
like manner, and so on forever. And it shall be the duty of the Trustees to fill all
other vacancies of their Board as soon after they occur as reasonably and conveniently
may be done: And provided further, That as vacancies shall occur in said
Board, they shall be so filled that the said Board shall, as soon as may be, and forever
after, consist of seven clergymen and ten laymen ;] and the Rev. Heman
Humphrey, D. D., is authorized to fix the time and place of the first meeting of the
said Trustees and to notify each of them thereof in writing.

SEC. 2. And be it further enacted, That the said Corporation shall have power and
authority to determine at what times and places their meetings shall be holden, and
the manner of notifying the Trustees to convene at such meetings ; and also, from
time to time, to elect a President of said College and such Professors, Tutors, Instructors,
and other officers of the said College, as they shall judge most for the interest
thereof, and to determine the duties, salaries, emoluments, responsibilities
and tenures of their several offices. And the said Corporation are further empowered
to purchase or erect, and keep in repair, such house^and other buildings, as
they shall judge necessary for the said College : and also to make and ordain, as
occasion may require, reasonable rules, orders and by-laws, not repugnant to the
Constitution and laws of this Commonwealth, with reasonable penalties, for the
good government of the said College, and for the regulation of their own body, and
also to determine and regulate the course of instruction in said College, and to confer
such Degrees as are usually conferred by Colleges in New England, [except
medical degrees :] Provided, nevertheless, that no corporate business shall be transacted,
unless nine, at least, of the Trustees are present.

SEC. 3. And be it further enacted, That the said Corporation may have a common
seal which they may alter or renew at their pleasure, and that all deeds sealed
with the seal of said Corporation and signed by their order, shall, when made in
their corporate name, be considered as the deeds of said Corporation ; and that said
Corporation may sue and be sued in all actions, real, personal or mixed, and may
prosecute the same to final judgment and execution, by the name of the Trustees
of Amherst College : and that said Corporation shall be capable of taking and
holding in fee simple, or any less estate, by gift, grant, bequest, devise, or otherwise,
any lands, tenements, or other estate, real or personal : Provided, that the
clear annual income of the same shall not exceed thirty thousand dollars.

SEC. 4. And be it further enacted, That the clear rents and profits of all the estate,
real and personal, of which the said Corporation shall be seized and possessed,
shall be appropriated to the endowment of said College, in such manner as shall
most effectually promote virtue and piety, and the knowledge of such of the languages
and the liberal and useful arts and sciences, as shall be directed from time to
time by the said Corporation, they conforming to the will of any donor or donors
in the application of any estate received, which may be given, devised, or bequeathed,
for any particular object connected with the College.

SEC. 5. And be it farther enacted, That the said Trustees be and are hereby authorized
to receive all the real estate, goods, chattels, choses in action, and property
of any description whatever, which has heretofore been given, conveyed, purchased,
bequeathed, devised, or in any other way secured or engaged to be given,
paid or devised, to the Trustees of Amherst Academy, with the intent and for the
purpose of establishing and maintaining a Classical or Collegiate Institution in
said town, and that all the said funds and estate as well as all other property which
may be received by them, shall be faithfully and forever used and appropriated according
to the will of the donors. [Provided, That the several acts and contracts
of the Trustees of Amherst Academy, relative to the property given for the benefit
and debts incurred by them for the use of the said Collegiate Institution, shall have
full force and be equally binding upon the Trustees of Aruherst College as they
now are upon the Trustees of said Academy.]

SEC. 6. And be it further enacted, That no Instructor in said College shall ever be
required by the Trustees to profess any particular religious opinions as a test of
office, and no student shall be [refused admission to or] denied any of the privileges,
[honors or degrees] of said College on account of the religious opinions he
may entertain.

SEC. 7. And be it further enacted, [That if it shall hereafter appear to the Legislature
of this Commonwealth lawful and expedient to remove Williams College to
the town of Amhersr, and the Trustees of Williams College shall agree so to do, the
Legislature shall have full power to unite Williams and Amherst Colleges into one
University at Amherst on such terms and conditions, and under such government,
as shall be agreed on by a majority of a Board of seven Commissioners, of whom
two shall be appointed by each of said Colleges, and three by the joint ballot of the
Legislature in convention of both Houses ; and in case the Commissioners, or either
of them, on the part of the Amherst College shall not be appointed, then the residue
of said Commissioners shall have full power to proceed in the premises: Provided
also, that if the said Trustees of Amherst Academy shall not, within eight months
from the passing of this act, by a good deed or deeds, assign, convey and make over,
to the said Trustees of Amherst College, their successors and assigns, all the real
estate, goods, chattels, choses in action and property mentioned in the fifth section of
this act, to be used and appropriated as is therein provided, this act shall be void.]
[In the original bill section seven reads as follows: And be it further enacted by the authority
aforesaid, That if the Trustees of Williams College shall, within seven years, signify
a desire of union with the College at Amherst, such union shall take place on terms to be
agreed upon by Commissioners appointed by the two Corporations: Provided that the terms
of union agreed upon shall receive the sanction of the Legislature.]

SEC. 8. And be it further enacted, That the Legislature of this Commonwealth
may grant any further powers to, or alter, limit, annul, or restrain, any of the
powers vested by this act in the said Corporation as shall be judged necessary to
promote the best interests of the said College, and more especially appoint and
establish overseers or visitors of the said College, with all necessary powers for
the better aid, preservation and government thereof,

Provided, That the granting of this Charter shall never be considered as any
pledge on the part of Government, that pecuniary aid shall hereafter be granted to
the College.

D.

In Chapter X., pages 150 and 157, we have given some account of the influence
exerted by the friends of Amherst College in changing the balance of political power
in 1823, when it was wavering between the Federal and the Republican parties, and
of the part which Rev. Austin Dickinson acted, in person and by his pen, in bringing
about this change. We give below an article from his pen which was published
in the National Aegis at Worcester, April 2, 1823, and, in part at least, published
also in other papers in Eastern Massachusetts and circulated as a handbill just before
the election. It was communicated to me by Rev. Oman Eastman and is attested
by the Librarian of the Antiquarian Library at Worcester as a true copy
from the National Aegis. It belongs to another age, not to say another world, from
that in which we now live and move, and is perhaps more than a curiosity, it is
perhaps due to history that it should be preserved as one among many illustrations
of the times.

FEDERAL REMONSTRANCE.

Mr. Editor: We refuse to support Mr. Otis' nomination at the election, 1st, because
it cannot be said to be a nomination made by the Federal population of the
State, but by the Boston and Cambridge junto. As an illustration of this fact let
it only be remembered that in the convention that nominated Mr. Otis, if we are
not mistaken, Boston had a greater representation than the four wealthy counties
of Worcester, Franklin, Hampshire and Hayden, with a population about four
times that of Boston.

2d, We object to Mr. Otis, as Christian patriots, on account of his IMMORAL
CHARACTER. We have too much regard for the honor of the Redeemer, and for
the honor of Massachusetts to have it said to the world, that we have elected a man
to rule over us, who in contempt of the laws of God and man, places himself on a
level with the lowest by habitual profane swearing, and by the habitual violation of
a command which we deem sacred, " Remember the Sabbath day to ketp it holy." We
blush for the cause of Truth, when we notice what is said in some of the Boston
papers, of pure moral character, and fear that the standard of morality which prevails
among a certain class in that city, is not the standard of the Bible. We are
not to be imposed upon by fair representations. Some of us have been in Boston
and have seen and heard Mr. Otis, on the Sabbath as well as on other days.

3d, We object to Mr. Otis because he is connected with a Boston and Harvard
College aristocracy, who have for several years past manifested a disposition to
have the disposal of all the important offices in the State; and because they are
acquiring a religious, as well as political control, which we regard as dangerous to
the civil and religious privileges of the great body of the Congregational, Baptist,
Methodist, and Episcopalian friends of true religion in the State. We think that
equal privileges should be extended to all denominations.

We are disposed to support the Republican candidates for the present year because
we regard them as gentlemen of distinguished ability, integrity, patriotism,
and truly liberal sentiments.

Mr. Eustis, after being elected to Congress, by the united vote of the Federalists
and Republicans of his district, has fulfilled the appointment to the entire satisfaction
of all. Mr.. Lincoln fulfilled the arduous duties of Speaker of the House of
Representatives, for the last year to the unanimous approbation of both parties, and
so long as they continue to serve with ability, faithfulness and impartiality we are
willing they should be our public servants. Our old partialities would indeed lead
us to prefer persons of the Federal party who might be named ; but we are aware
that setting up new candidates at the present time would prevent a choice being
made by the people, and we dare not risk the consequences of having the election

of Governor made by the Legislature.

SERIOUS FEDERALISTS IN THE COUNTRY.

A true copy from The National Aegis. S.F.H.

Worcester, April 2, 1823.

The second paragraph of the above was circulated in Boston as a handbill, and
published in The Daily Advertiser, and in The Salem Gazette, just before the election.
E. NIMROUD SLABS AND THEIR TRANSLATION.

One of the most curious and unique books it the Library of Amherst College
bears the above title. It is mainly in manuscript. The remainder is made up of
photographs. The title-page only is printed and reads as follows : " Photographs
of the Inscriptions of the Mural Slabs now resting in the Dickinson Nineveh Gallery
in Amherst College. Also the manuscript translation of the same, by Rev. W.
H. Ward of the Class of 1856. The Slabs were procured by Rev. Henry Lobdell of
the Class of 1849."

Mr. Ward who has shed lustre on the College and the country by deciphering
and translating these inscriptions, is now one of the editors of The Independent, and
was offered the appointment of archaeologist in the exploring expedition just senfrout
by the American Palestine Exploration Company to the country east of the Jordan.

The first page of the manuscript bears the following separate title and introductory
note : " Translation of the Inscription repeated on the different Mural Slabs
from the Palace of Assurnazirbal, King of Assyria, built in the City of Calah, the
modern Nimroud. Assurnazirbal ascended the throne July 2, 930 years before
Christ, (as deduced from a solar eclipse that occurred on that day and to which he
often refers in his Annals as a favorable omen,) and reigned till 905 B. C. The
lines in the Transliteration
[Manuscript copy of the cuneiform characters, accompanied by interlinear translations.]
follow Slab No 3 in the Dickinson Nineveh Gallery,
Amherst College. The same inscription is repeated on the Slabs from the same Palace
now in the Cabinets of Yale, Williams, and other Colleges."

FREE TRANSLATION.

This is the Palace of Assurnazirbal, servant of the supreme god, Assur, servant
of the gods, Bel, the shining Ninib, Cannes and Dagon, servant of the great gods,
great King, mighty King, King of Legions, King of Assyria, Son of Tiglath-Ninib,
great King, mighty King, King of Legions, King of Assyria; Son of Bel-nizari,
King of Legions, King of Assyria; strong Warrior who marched here and there
in the service of Assur his lord ; who had no equal among the Princes of the four
regions; brave Commander, fearing no opponents ; strong, unrivalled Leader, King
bringing under subjection the rebels against him ; who governs many legions of
men; mighty Champion trampling on the backs of his stout enemies, crushing all
his foes, the masses of the rebels ; a King who marched here and there in the service
of the great gods his lords, and whose hand subdued all the provinces, and
who gained the mastery over all the forests, who subjected all their power, taking
hostages, imposing laws over all those provinces.

When the supreme god, Assur, speaking my name and enlarging my Royalty,
gave his unstinted support to the service of my Royalty, I attacked the army of
the land of Lulla, a land of extended waters. In the midst of battle I slew them
with arrows to the delight ? of II, Ninib and Yav, gods whom I serve. The countries
of Nam, Gilhi, and Subarie I attacked and conquered.

I am the King who reduced under his feet the territory from the ford of the
Tigris unto Lebanon and the Mediterranean Sea, a land not previously acquired
and also the land of Zuhi as far as the City of Kapigi; who annexed to his land the
Territory from the source of the river Zubnat as far as Armenia, the neighborhood
of Gilruri as far as Gozan, from the ford of the Lower Zab as far as the City Tel
Bari which is beyond the province of the Zab, from the City Tel Abtani as far as
the City Tel Zabtani, the cities of Hiritu and Harutu, a well watered ? country and
also the land of Kardunias. Incorporated the inhabitants of the neighborhood of
Bubite as far as Tarmar among the people, under my immediate sway. Over these
territories I appointed my Lieutenants and imposed taxes.

I am Assurnazirbal, humble servant of the great gods, generous stout soldier,
capturing all the cities and open country, King of lords, devouring the rebellious,
strengthening the peaceful, not fearing opponents, not sparing his foes, a King the
glory of whose face has covered the lands and the seas which are reduced under
his dominion, not fearing mighty kings and extending his power from the rising
of the sun to its setting

The early City of Calah which my predecessor, Shalmanezer, King of Assyria,
had built, had fallen into decay. His city I rebuilt, captives which I had taken
in the countries which I conquered, the land of Zuhi not previously conquered, the
City of Lutga and the region of Euphrates, from all the land of Zamua, from the
lands of Bitadini and Pate from Lubarna King of Patinai, I collected and transported
them to the City of Calah. I threw down the old mound and leveled it to
the water. I laid in order one hundred and twenty courses on the bottom. I placed
thereon a palace of cedar-wood, box-wood, cypress wood, arrow-wood, rukanni
wood, butni wood and halpi wood, for the seat of my royalty, for the fullness of my
princedom for all future time. I made in stone images of animals of the mountains
and seas, and set them up in its gates and consecrated them. I roofed it with
plates of copper. I hung in its gates folding doors of cedar-wood, box-wood, fir-wood
and rukanni wood. I gathered in great quantities silver, gold, tin, copper, iron
which I had captured in the countries which I conquered, and deposited them in
the midst of the palace.

WILLIAM HAYES WARD, '56.

The above translation occupies four manuscript pages. Then follow nineteen
pages of Transliteration and interlinear translation, (a page being devoted to each
line of the inscription,) in which the inscription is first copied in cuneiform characters,
secondly reproduced word by word and letter by letter in the Roman alphabet,
and thirdly translated literally, word for word, into English, thus exhibiting
to the eye of the curious reader the structure and arrangement of the language and
furnishing the philological student, so far forth, a chrestomathy for the study of its
grammar and lexicography.

The whole is dated "Independent Office, July 11, 1871," and inscribed, "A Jubilee Offering".

Pages 667-671 include the index and a statement: "On page 290, line 20, for Humphrey read Hitchcock".

