CHAPTER XII.
IT was in 1825, shortly after the grant of the charter, that
the first measures were taken for the establishment of a separate
College church. The origin of this movement and the motives
of the original members are thus stated in the church records :

" It having appeared to many of the pious friends of Amherst
College, that the existence of a church in that Seminary would
tend in a high degree to promote the great object which its
founders and benefactors had chiefly in view, viz., to advance
the kingdom of Christ the Redeemer, by training many pious
youth for the gospel ministry, several of the students also having
expressed their desire to be formed into a church specially
connected with the College, and the officers of the Faculty having
signified their approbation of such a measure, the subject of
founding a church was laid before the Trustees at their special
meeting in April, 1825, by the President. The Trustees, therefore,
passed the following resolution, viz., that Rev. Heman
Humphrey, D. D., Rev. Joshua Crosby, and Rev. James Taylor,
be a committee to consider the expediency of establishing a
College Church in this Institution, and to proceed to form one
should they deem it expedient.

" The above named committee assembled at Amherst on the
7th of March, 1826, and after deliberation on the subject referred
to their wisdom and discretion, they resolved themselves
into an Ecclesiastical Council.

" The council then voted to proceed to form a church in Amherst
College on the principles of the Congregational platform,
of such persons desiring it as should upon examination be
judged by them to be entitled to the privileges of church membership
and should be able heartily to assent to the following
articles of faith and covenant:

" We believe

" That there is but one living and true God, and that the
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament were written under
his infallible guidance, and constitute the only perfect rule of
faith and practice.

" That the one God exists in three persons, Father, Son and
Holy Ghost, the same in substance, equal in power and glory.

" That God created all things for his own holy pleasure and
honor, and directs all events according to Jhis own benevolent,
eternal and immutable purposes.

" That the first man was formed upright and holy, but by disobedience
involved both himself and his whole posterity in the
entire loss of the Divine image and the Divine favor.

" That the atonement by Jesus Christ, who was the Son manifest
in the flesh, has opened a way for the restoration and salvation
of all men on the condition of repentance towards God,
and faith in the Lord Jesus Christ.

" That genuine repentance and sincere faith and all right affections
proceed from the Holy Ghost, who, through the revealed
word, and according to the gracious pleasure of God,
renews the heart in righteousness and true holiness.

"That all who thus repent and believe, being justified by
faith, will be saved only on account of Christ the Mediator and
Redeemer, and will continue in holiness and enjoy the blessedness
of heaven forever.

"While all who die without repentance, will at the day of
judgment be condemned for their own sins, and will remain in
impenitence and justly suffer everlasting punishment.

" We enter into solemn covenant with Jehovah and with this
church.

" To God our Creator, Redeemer and Sacrificer, we sacredly
devote ourselves and ours without reserve and forever.

" And we solemnly engage as partakers of the same hope and

joy, to maintain the discipline and observe the ordinances of

Christ, promising to seek always the peace and purity of this

church, that all its members in holy love and harmony may
enjoy the fellowship of the Lord Jesus, watching, reproving,
exhorting and comforting each other for mutual edification, and
looking for that blessed hope, the glorious appearing of the great
God, even our Saviour Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us
that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself,
a peculiar people, zealous of good works."
[It has always been understood that the confession and covenant were drawn up
by Prof. Fiske. The clearness, conciseness, comprehensiveness, and consistency
of the articles, certainly correspond with this traditional authorship.]

Thirty-one persons, all students, and members of each of the
four classes, were then " examined by the council, and having
publicly assented to the preceding articles and covenant, after
an appropriate address by Dr. Humphrey, were solemnly constituted
the ' Church of Christ in Amherst College.' The church
was then commended in prayer to the covenanted blessings of
the one God, Father, Son and Holy Ghost."

The style of the church is worthy of notice. Although formed
on the principles of the Congregational platform, it has never
assumed any denominational name, but has always been styled
" the Church of Christ in Amherst College."

A sentence or two from the address of Dr. Humphrey will
show the high hopes and the deep interest with which he contemplated
the establishment of the College church.

" You will permit me to congratulate the friends of the Redeemer
and of the College upon the transactions of this solemn
and interesting occasion. The Institution is now at length fully
organized. The church is established, which, we trust, will never
be moved, on whose ample records the names of unborn thousands
will be enrolled, in answer to whose prayers, tens of thousands
will be brought into the kingdom of Christ, and by the
instrumentality of whose sons the gospel will be carried to the
ends of the earth."

At a meeting of the church, May 7, 1826, Rev. Heman Humphrey,
D. D., was chosen Moderator, and Reuben Tinker, Scribe,
and at a meeting, July 7, regulations were adopted for the admission
of members, according to which all candidates, including
such as shall bring letters from other churches, shall be examined
by a committee consisting of the Moderator and such
number of the brethren as the church may determine, and all
such examinations of candidates shall be in a meeting of the
church, so that any member of the church may also have the opportunity
to propose any inquiry, and that the candidate may
then and there give his assent to the confession of faith and
covenant. It was not till the 26th of October, that any members
other than students were admitted to the College church,
when Mrs. Humphrey was received by letter from the church at
Pittsfield, Professor and Mrs. Hitchcock from the church in Conway,
Prof. Fiske from Dartmouth College, and Professors Worcester
and Abbott from the church in the Theological Seminary
at Andover. At a meeting in November, the church resolved to
meet for religious exercises once in two weeks, on Saturday evening,
and that at each meeting some subject or question, selected
by the Moderator, and announced at the previous meeting, should
be discussed. How long this arrangement continued, does not
appear from the records. As early as 1829, such meetings had
ceased to be held regularly, although Saturday evening long
continued to be the evening for special meetings of the College
church, and of professors of religion in seasons of religious interest.
And no member of the church, or professor of religion
who ever attended one of these meetings, will ever forget the
wise fatherly counsels and the tender brotherly expostulations
and entreaties of Dr. Humphrey on such occasions.

The church remained almost a year without a pastor, Dr.
Humphrey acting meanwhile as permanent Moderator. In February,
1827, after careful consideration and conference with the
Trustees by committees, the church, with the full approval of
the Trustees and the Faculty, resolved that it was expedient to
complete its organization by the election and installation of a
pastor, and by a unanimous vote they chose Dr. Humphrey for
their first pastor. The installation took place on the 28th of
February, 1827, in connection with the dedication of the newCollege
chapel. The churches represented in the Council were
the First, Second and Third churches in Amherst, and the
churches in Hadley, Northampton, Sunderland, Enfield, New
Braintree, Shelburne, North Brookfield and Springfield. In the
order of exercises, portions of the Scripture were read by Mr.
Washburn of Amherst ; the introductory prayer was offered by
Dr. Woodbridge of Hadley ; the sermon, having particular reference
to the dedication of the chapel, was preached by Dr.
Humphrey; the installing prayer was offered by Mr. Crosby of
Enfield ; the charge to the pastor was given by Mr. Fiske of
New Braintree; the fellowship of the churches was expressed
by Mr. Snell of North Brookfield ; and the concluding prayer
was offered by Mr. Chapin of South Amherst.

The pulpit of the new chapel was occupied by the pastor
every other Sabbath, and by the other clerical members of the
Faculty in rotation on each alternate Sabbath ; and at their first
meeting after the opening of the chapel, the Trustees appropriated
two hundred dollars, that is, five dollars a Sabbath, as the
compensation for this service. This appropriation was renewed
at each annual meeting for fifteen or twenty years. The sum
was at length doubled, and since that time ten dollars a Sabbath
has been the remuneration for the supply of the College pulpit,
or, as the Trustees would perhaps prefer to put it, their recognition
of the service.

The usual religious meetings of the week at this time, besides
the public services of the Sabbath, were the religious lecture on
Thursday evening, conducted by the President and the preaching
Professors in rotation, the meetings of the several classes
by themselves on Friday evening, the meetings of the church,
and sometimes of all the professors of religion on Saturday
evening, and the prayer -meeting for all the students, during the
hour immediately preceding public worship Sabbath morning.

It should also be noticed that it was in 1827 that the plan was
introduced of a weekly Bible exercise in each of the classes.
The historical parts of the Bible were assigned to the Freshman
class, the prophetical parts to the Sophomores, the doctrinal
parts to the Juniors, and the Seniors studied the Assembly'
s Catechism with the President. The instruction of
the lower classes was so apportioned among the Professors and
Tutors that the whole Faculty, with rare exceptions, took more
or less part in these biblical exercises. And the Bible lesson,
instead of being put on Monday morning as it often is in schools,
was assigned to Thursday afternoon, for the express purpose of
bringing it alongside of the Thursday evening lecture, and
thus breaking up, if possible, the current of secular labors and
worldly thoughts by the introduction of sacred studies and religious
influences into the very middle of the week.

In his letter accepting the invitation of the church to become
their pastor, Dr Humphrey said : " Let it be our united and
fervent prayer to God, brethren, that he will prepare us all for
the contemplated solemnities, that he will enable me to be faithful
as a spiritual guide and overseer, that he will pour out his
Spirit upon the church so recently established in this Seminary,
and make it the pillar and ground of the truth here, that its
light may be seen and its example be felt by every member of
College, that great additions may be made to it from every successive
class of such as shall be saved, and that it may shine
brighter and brighter upon this consecrated eminence from generation
to generation."

Scarcely had all these arrangements for a thoroughly Christian
teaching and influence been consummated, when, doubtless in
answer to prayer asked by the pastor and offered not only in
the church and the College but by pious parents and the friends
of sanctified learning in every part of the country, the Spirit
was poured out in copious effusions, and the new pastor, the new
church and the new chapel all received a fresh consecration ;
scarcely were these various, ample and appropriate channels for
the truth and the Spirit of God opened, when they were filled
with Divine influences ; scarcely had they brought all their
tithes into the storehouse when the windows of heaven were
opened, and a blessing was poured down that there was scarcely
room enough to receive it.

The following narrative of this first revival under the pastorate
and presidency of Dr. Humphrey, was communicated by him
to the Christian public under date of May 15, 1827 :

" As our spring term has just closed under circumstances of
peculiar interest, we feel constrained by a sense of gratitude to
declare what God has done for us and to acquaint the friends of
Zion with the present religious state of this College. Four years
ago, and less than two years after its first organization, the Institution
was favored with a remarkable season of ' refreshing
from the presence of the Lord.' Since that time, although a
majority of the students have always been professedly pious,
there have been but few conversions till within the last few
weeks.

" A year ago the church was partially revived and a little cloud
seemed for a few days to be hovering over the Seminary ; but
it soon disappeared. This year the last Thursday of February
was observed in the usual manner as a day of fasting and prayer
for the outpouring of God's Spirit upon Colleges. The following
week our new chapel was dedicated, and a pastor was set
over our infant church. Both these occasions were marked with
uncommon interest and solemnity, and our hopes were a little
revived, but they were not sustained by any apparent increase
of right feeling. As the term advanced, some few, I believe,
went up more than ' seven times' to look for the harbinger of a
spiritual shower, before they could discover anything. At length,
when many thought it too late for a revival, as vacation was so
near, by the blessing of God upon some special efforts to rouse
professors from their slumbers, they began to open their eyes
and to tremble. This was not far from the middle of April.
Searchings of heart soon became deep and distressing. Mairy
were ready to give up hopes which they had cherished for years,
and it was impossible for us long to doubt that a revival was begun
in the church.

" In the meantime, there was a noise and shaking among the
dry bones. The impenitent began to be serious, to be alarmed,
to ask, ' What shall we do to be saved ? ' and then to rejoice in
hope. By the 20th of April, five or six in the Freshman class
appeared to have a new song put into their mouths, and from
that time the work advanced with surprising rapidity and power.
Convictions were in general short, and, in many cases, extremely
pungent. Of the thirty in College who perhaps gave some evidence
of faith and repentance, and who are beginning to cherish
hope, twenty at least are supposed to have experienced relief in
the space of a single week. ' It is the Lord's doings, and marvelous
in our eyes.'

"As this gracious visitation seemed to demand a public acknowledgment
to the great Head of the Church, before we separated
at the close of the term, a religious service was appointed
as the last exercise, and a very appropriate and impressive discourse
was delivered in the chapel by the Rev. Dr. Woodbridge
of Hadley."

To this narrative written at the time by the pastor, we subjoin
recollections by several who were students at the time that
it may be seen also from their point of view.

" The most remarkable and important event of our College
course, was the revival of 1827. I was away from College on
account of ill-health at the time it commenced. In my absence
of three weeks, not out of town, I was visited by two of my
classmates who came to talk with me in relation to my duty to become
a Christian. And when I returned to College, the stillness
and seriousness pervading the whole Institution made every
day seem like the Sabbath in its most strict observance. The
meetings for prayer among the students, held by classes, or the
occupants of entries, or other divisions, and the more general
meetings conducted by the Faculty, were so frequent, solemn,
earnest, and pervaded by the evident presence of God, that I could
not but be strongly impressed. Two or three, or it may be four,
of the forty in the class, (1828) did not seem to be much moved,
all the rest were manifestly. I think it was not more than three
weeks after my return to the class, before the close of the term.
But the whole College was so influenced in that time that
through the rest of the year it had an entirely different aspect
from any time before. Our class, then Juniors, was very essentially
changed in character. Two who had been decidedly skeptical,
Kidder and Winn, became decided and earnest Christians.
Humphrey, the President's oldest son, had been altogether irreligious,
wild and negligent of all study except in the rhetorical
department and general literature. He became, for the rest of
his College course, correct in his conduct, serious and earnest as
a Christian, diligent and faithful as a student. The change as
to interest in religious things, was also marked in other cases,
such as Fuller, Hunt,
[Rev. Daniel Hunt of Pomfret, Conn.]
Lothrop
[Hon. E. H. Lothrop of Michigan.]
and Spotswood.
[Rev. J. B. Spotswood, D. D. of Virginia.]
I think eleven
of the class united with the College church or other churches
as the result of this revival. Among them were some of the
foremost men of the class.

" Of the class before us, (1827) I suppose McClure
[Rev. A. W. McClure, D. D., late Secretary of American and Foreign Christian
Union.]
was the
most remarkable instance of conversion, I mean publicly the
most remarkable.
Perhaps the conversion of Timothy Dwight
[Tutor and Missionary.]
,
really the first scholar of the class, may have been as interesting
to those who knew him well.
In the class after us, (1829)
the most marked and externally wonderful change was in Henry
Lyman who was afterwards the martyr missionary with Muuson
killed by the Battas of Sumatra. Lyman had been one of the
worst, of the boldest in wickedness, apparently defying the
authority of God ; but when he came under the power of God's
truth and Spirit, he became as ardent and bold for Christ as
before he had been in opposition to all good."
[Letter of Rev. A. Tobey, D. D., Class of '28. For Mr. Lyman's account of
his own conversion and other incidents of this revival, see his journal and letters
in the memoir by his sister, Miss Hannah Lyman, Principal of Vassar College.]

" An incident illustrative of strong faith in prayer, was this :
In the south entry of South College there were a number of
our most godly young men, while the majority were impenitent.
After mature deliberation, the former resolved to hold a
daily prayer-meeting of one hour for the conversion of the unconverted
in that entry. The meetings were sustained with
vigor and strong faith, the Holy Spirit wrought powerfully in
their midst, and only a few weeks passed away before every
student in the south entry of the old South College was converted
to Christ."
[Rev. T. R. Cressey, Class of '28.]

" The students made frequent calls on each other to converse
upon the greatest of all subjects, the welfare of souls, and usually
joined in prayer before they separated. The meetings of
literary societies were turned to prayer-meetings, and frequently
the instructors united with their classes in prayer in their recitation
rooms. Meetings were well attended and very solemn,
particularly those which were held Sabbath mornings at half
past nine o'clock. At these meetings, as well as others, the impenitent
were warned and urged to accept the Savior by those
who had formerly been their companions in sin. It was a deeply
affecting scene to witness the love of Christ proclaimed from
lips so lately addicted to profanity. Anxious meetings were
held two evenings in a week, and there are few of the impenitent
that have not attended them. Many of the subjects of
this work have been those who were farthest from God and all
good, not only unbelieving, but wild and reckless.

" About nine-tenths of the Senior and Sophomore classes are
now the hopeful subjects of renewing grace. The probable
number of those who have indulged hopes, is about forty, including
six or eight who had formerly professed religion but
who now felt that they had been deceived. The most prominent
characteristics of this revival have been great heart-searchings
among professing Christians, deep and frequent convictions
of sin, and trembling hopes."
[Rev. William A. Hyde, Class of '29, from a narrative contributed by him at the
time to the Religious Intelligencer at New Haven.]

A very full and interesting narrative of this revival forms the
principal part of one of the chapters in Prof. Abbott's " CornerStone.
"
[Corner-Stone, p. 364. The letters of Mr. McClure, printed by Prof. Abbott, and
indeed the whole narrative, should be read by those who would gain an adequate
conception of the miracles of grace in this revival.]
From this and indeed from the recollections of other
eye-witnesses, it appears that before the revival, irreligion, skepticism,
open infidelity, blasphemy even, and ridicule of sacred
things had become exceedingly bold. The year previous, some
six or eight of the most bold, hardened and notorious enemies
of religion, after trying in vain to break up meetings of the
pious students by banded and brow-beating intrusions, resolved
to have a meeting of their own from which every friend of religion
should be excluded. One of the officers was invited to
conduct the meeting.

" The officer addressed them faithfully and plainly, urging
their duty and their sins upon their consideration, while they
sat still, in respectful but heartless silence ; looking intently
upon him with an expression of countenance which seemed to
say, ' Here we all are, move us if you can.' And they conquered.
They went home unmoved. They continued to assemble
for several weeks, inviting the officers in succession to
be present, and at last the few who remained conducted the
meetings themselves, with burlesque sermons and mock prayers,
and closed the series at last, as I have been informed, by bringing
in an ignorant black man whose presence and assistance
completed the victory they had gained over influences from
above.

" This year, (1827,) an attempt was made to repeat those
transactions, but with a very different result. A Tutor
[Tutor B. B. Edwards.]
was
invited to hold the meeting.
A Hebrew Bible was waggishly
placed on the stand. After opening the meeting with prayer,
he entered into a defence of the Holy Scriptures from external
and internal evidence which he maintained in the most convincing
manner, and then on the strength of this authority, he
urged its promises and denunciations upon them as sinners.
The effect was very powerful. Several retired deeply impressed,
and all were made more serious and better prepared to be influenced
by the truth." After several days of anxious inquiry,
under the wise guidance of the pastor the young man at whose
room and by whose invitation the meeting was held, was led to
the Savior and sat clothed and in his right mind at his feet.
That young man was afterwards Rev. A. W. McClure, D. D.,
the eloquent and able preacher, author, editor and secretary.
The leader of the banded opposition the previous year also now
became as bold and zealous in the advocacy of truth and piety
as he had been of irreligion. This was Henry Lyman, the missionary
and martyr of Sumatra. " There were many other cases
as marked and striking as these. Out of the whole number
of those who had been irreligious at its commencement, about
one-half professed to have given themselves up to God, but as to
the talent and power of opposition, and open enmity the vice,
the profaneness, the dissipation the revival took the whole,
with one or tyvo exceptions, it took the whole. And when, a
few weeks afterwards, the time arrived for those thus changed
to make a public profession of religion, it was a striking spectacle
to see them standing in a crowd in the broad aisle of the
College chapel, purified, sanctified, and in the presence of all
their fellow-students renouncing sin and solemnly consecrating
themselves to God. Some years have since elapsed, and they
are in his service now. I have their names before me, and I do
not know of one who does not continue faithful to his Master
still."

With the caution and prudence which Dr. Humphrey always
carefully observed in such matters, the converts of this revival
were not received immediately into the church, but were instructed
by the pastor somewhat like the catechumens in the
early Christian church, and edified in the faith, hope and love of
the gospel for several months before they made a public profession
of their attachment to the Lord Jesus. Hitherto the Faculty
and pious students of the College had united with the village
church in the celebration of the Lord's Supper. On the
19th of August, 1827, this sacrament was administered for the
first time in the College chapel, and it was a eucharist indeed, a
festival of thanksgiving and praise, made doubly joyful by the
number and character of those who now for the first time participated
in the feast. Twenty students, converts of the revival,
from all the different classes, joined themselves to the church at
this communion. One or two had joined earlier and others
united with the church in College or elsewhere at subsequent
communions. We have not space for the names, and some of
them would be unknown to most of our readers. But to one
who knows their subsequent history, it is delightful to look
over the list and see, how all without exception have adorned
their profession, how nearly all have been able and faithful ministers
of the gospel, while not a few have been distinguished as
preachers, teachers and missionaries at home or in foreign lands.
If the tree is known by its fruit, certainly this revival (and the
same is true of many others that have succeeded it), was a good
tree whose fruit enriched the College, refreshed the churches
and was for the healing of the nations.

The following extract illustrates how the converts began at
once to co-operate with those who had prayed and labored for
their conversion, in missionary efforts for the instruction of the
ignorant, the care of the neglected and the salvation of the lost.
" Soon after I entered College, in 1825, I was walking on the
road to Pelham, and on the plain east of East street, I saw a
number of families of colored people. I inquired if they would
like a meeting at one of their houses Sabbath afternoon. The
proposal was welcomed, the meeting was holden, and from that
time a meeting, with a Sabbath-school, was sustained during my
College course. Henry Lyman, after his conversion, assisted me
in these meetings. Sometimes there were as many as seventy
or more colored people at those meetings. How much good was
accomplished or what has become of the meetings or the colored
people, I do not know."
[Rev. E. D. Eldredge, Class of '29.]
That was the beginning of a missionary
enterprise which, with occasional interruptions, has been
ever since sustained by the students of Amherst College, and
which under the fostering care chiefly of the ladies of the College
church, has grown into the church and congregation that
now worship in Zion chapel on the west side of the College
grounds.

The next year, viz., during the latter part of the spring term
of 1828, another season of revival was enjoyed, " highly interesting,
" (in the language of the church record, which is in the
handwriting of Prof. Fiske,) " although not so rapid or powerful
as that of 1827. There seemed to be less of self-scrutiny
in the members of the church and professors of religion, and
less of importunity in prayer. But the Holy Spirit manifestly
descended, and it was supposed that about fourteen members of
College experienced his regenerating influences."

" There were two revivals during my College course " writes
Rev. Asa Bullard " in 1827 and 1828. I think it was the latter,
and only a few weeks before the close of the term, that Dr.
Humphrey was all ready one Saturday to start for his former
home in Pittsfield, when some students called on him and told
him there were signs of seriousness in the College. Dr. Humphrey
turned out his horse and gave up his visit. At evening
prayers he stopped the pious students and gave them a most
solemn exhortation to earnest prayer and faithful labor for a revival.
The Holy Spirit was evidently present. Sabbath day
several were hopefully converted, and for a day or two conversions
were constantly occurring; when all at once the work
seemed to stop.
Monday morning the President again stopped
the pious students at prayers, and in the most solemn and deeply
anxious manner, said : ' Something is wrong.' Never shall I
forget that day, and many will probably remember while they
live that ' Judgment-like Monday.' The students were gathered
everywhere in little clusters, as solemn as if some great calamity
had just fallen upon us. Soon the College was one great house
of prayer. In every entry and from many a room could be heard
the voice of the most earnest, agonizing supplication. From
that hour the work went on. Those who were bowed down
under conviction of sin found relief, and there were conversions
almost every day till the close of the term."

At a meeting of the church on Saturday evening, July 5,
1828, " in preparation for the Lord's Supper to be .kept on the
approaching Sabbath, July 6," " the pastor stated to the church
that the furniture for the ordinance of the supper was a joint
present from the pastor and Professors Hitchcock, Fiske, Worcester
and Abbott."

The next Saturday evening, July 12, the first case of discipline
was brought before the church by the pastor at the instance
of members of the church who "declared themselves
much grieved by the deportment of brother , particularly
his indulgence of anger and use of profane language."
The discipline was conducted according to the method and
spirit of the gospel, with faithful admonitions and much forbearance
on the part of the pastor and the church, to a successful
issue. The offending brother made a written acknowledgment,
expressing his sorrow and asking forgiveness, and "it
being read in his presence, the church voted their acceptance
of the same and their continuance of Christian charity and
fellowship."

On Sunday, July 13, " the first baptism in the church occurred
(in the case of the children of members) in the baptism of
the infant son of Prof. Hitchcock, named Edward."

At the celebration of the Lord's Supper, November 2, 1828,
Mrs. Harriet V. Abbott and Horatio B. Hackett, with others,
made a public profession of their faith in Christ; and March 1,
1829, " Mr. Ebenezer Strong Snell and Mrs. Sabra C. Snell were
admitted by profession."

In the course of the same year, we find records of the earliest
appointments of delegates to attend ecclesiastical councils
with the pastor, viz., April 14, of Prof. Worcester for the dismission
of Rev. Mr. Chapin at South Amherst ; in June, of Prof.
Hitchcock, for his installation at Westhampton ; and October 4,
of Prof. Hitchcock, for the ordaining of Mr. Elijah C. Bridgman,
missionary to China, at Belchertown. The ordination of
Mr. Bridgman took place on the 6th of October, and President
Humphrey preached the sermon.

In the spring term of 1830, a friend of temperance, (afterwards
ascertained to be Mr. John Tappan of Boston,) offered a
premium of four hundred dollars for the best essays on the subject
of temperance to be delivered at the four ensuing Commencements,
and to be awarded one hundred dollars each year by the
then Senior, Junior, Sophomore and Freshman classes, on the
condition of there being a universal agreement of the students to
abstain from the use of wine, spirits and tobacco for the whole
College course. The condition was not fully accepted by the
students, that was more than could be expected of any College
; but the proposal led to the formation of the Antivenenian
Society in August, 1830, on the basis of a pledge of total abstinence
from ardent spirits, wine, opium and tobacco, as articles
of luxury or diet, which pledge was signed by all the officers
and a large majority of the students. Essays were written and
read, and liberal premiums were given, the first of which was
awarded to Lewis Sabin of the Class of '31. So far from withholding
or reducing the sum originally offered, Mr. Tappan gave
five hundred dollars to the College, which was made the occasion
of collecting the three or four thousand dollars expended by Prof.
Hovey in the purchase of books, the most important early addition
to the College library. Thus originated the College Temperance
Society, which still lives and embraces the larger part of the officers
and students in its membership, of which the President of
the College has always been the President, and Professors Hitchcock
the elder, Tyler and Hitchcock the younger, the successive
Secretaries, and whose roll of heroes and martyrs, now long
enough to reach across a good-sized lecture room, and growing
larger every year, has been exhibited by the President, or the
Secretary, or both together, to each successive class of Freshmen
soon after their entrance, and has received the signature of
a majority, usually a large majority, of every class for more than
forty years. We are not so credulous as to believe that this
pledge has been faithfully kept by all the signers. But the
greater part have kept it, and it has been a safeguard to many
students, and a blessing to the College.
[The pledge to total abstinence from intoxicating drinks is now separate from
the others, and is taken by many who do not pledge themselves to abstain from
tobacco.]

This temperance movement, thus early originated, was a connecting
link chronologically, doubtless also in the chain of cause
and effect, between the revivals of 1827 and 1828, and that of
1831. Without the revivals of 1827 and 1828, the students
certainly could not have been brought up to a stand in the cause
of temperance so far in advance of the age.
[Total abstinence from ardent spirits was then the advanced position assumed by
the friends of temperance. The inclusion of wine, opium and tobacco in the pledge
was a radical innovation.]
And without the
temperance reform in 1830, the revival in 1831 would probably
have been less powerful than it was, perhaps would not have
existed.

The revival of 1831 occurred in the spring term, like all those
which had preceded it, but it began earlier in the term than
those of 1827 and 1828. The concert of prayer for Colleges,
the last Thursday of February prepared the way for it. The
sickness and sudden death of a member of the Senior class
produced a deep and solemn impression. The seriousness began
in that class, and among its leading scholars, not a few
of whom were then without hope in Christ. Deeply convinced
of the vanity of the highest worldly good, and of the folly
and criminality of an irreligious life, these leading men, one
after another, renounced the world and consecrated themselves
to the service of their Redeemer. Thus the influence spread
silently and gradually through the class, and from the Senior
class, by a law as natural as that by which water runs down
hill, it flowed through the College.
At the communion in May, seven
[Including Story Hebard, Tutor, afterwards missionary.], and at that in August, nineteen members of College,
twenty five in all, were gathered into the College church
as the fruits of this rich harvest season.
How many joined
other churches, I do not know ; but according to the best of
my recollection, between thirty and forty were reckoned as converts.
Among those who joined the College church and began
a new life at this time from the two upper classes, it may be
proper to name, as known to the public, Jonathan Brace, Ebenezer
Burgess, Orlow M. Dorman, James Garvin, Chester Lord,
Thatcher Thayer, Wellington H. Tyler and George Waters of
the Class of '31, and Samuel Hopkins and Henry Morris of the
Class of '32. The reader will pardon a personal allusion to the
beloved brother whose name occurs in the above list. His
work as an educator of young ladies was done, and well done,
in less than a dozen years, and he is now, I trust, in heaven.
He owed to Araherst College not only his education and his
power to teach, but his new birth and Christian life. Early one
morning he came to my room in the Academy where I was then
teaching, full of sorrow for sin and anxiety for his soul. I conversed
and prayed with him, giving him the best counsel I could
from my limited experience, and at the same time advising him to
call on Dr. Humphrey and take counsel with him. But without
waiting for him to do so, I went immediately to Dr. Humphrey and
acquainted him with the facts. It was the first case of anxious
inquiry, and the President was taken a little by surprise. It was,
however, a glad surprise. He started up as if he had received some
good news, which at the same time called for immediate action :
he said, we must be up and doing. He sought an interview
with the first inquirer, and my brother was soon rejoicing in
hope, cheerful and joyful as a little child. The President, whose
ear was always open to the first sound of " a going in the tops
of the mulberry trees," now girded himself instantly for the
battle, and summoned his colleagues also, and his younger
brethren to buckle on their armor. Among the special means
which were used for the furtherance of this good work, my mind
dwells with chief interest on the services which were held on
Sunday, Tuesday and Thursday evenings for the preaching of
the word of God and the way of salvation. Dr. Humphrey
preached more frequently than any one else. The sinfulness of
man and the sovereignty of God, the deceitfulness of the human
heart, and the subtle devices of Satan, were among his favorite
topics. And the word of God in his hands was quick and powerful,
sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing even to the
dividing asunder of soul and spirit. Prof. Hitchcock came next
with his awakening, alarming and convincing " revival sermons "
which he began to preach in revivals in Conway, and which he
preached with increasing power to so many successive generations
of College students. Prof. Fiske preached less frequently,
but with a clearness of statement, a discrimination of character
and doctrine, and a cogency of argument which left no ground
for the unbeliever or disbeliever to stand upon, for the impenitent
sinner no place to hide his head. Never before, perhaps
never since, have I heard preaching which made God appear so
great and good, man so insignificant, so criminal, so inexcusable
in his disobedience and neglect of so great salvation. Night
after night the old " Rhetorical Room " was crowded with young
men of all classes and characters, in every stage of religious
and irreligious thought and feeling, listening with all the acuteness
of their cultivated minds, and all the warmth of their
quickened emotions, listening, not a few of them, as for their
lives to the preaching of the law of God, and the gospel of
Christ. And morning after morning the hearts of the preachers
and pious hearers were rejoiced by the good tidings of classmates
and friends that were singing the new song, that were
entering upon the new life.

" I presume I utter a sentiment very generally entertained "
so writes a member of the Class of '31, who has been greatly
useful both as a pastor and as a teacher, " when I say that
during my ministry I have esteemed the revivals in which I
have been allowed to take part, as pure and truly beneficial very
much in proportion to their likeness to those which I witnessed
in College, and if I have ever succeeded in conducting a revival
so as to have any good results, I trace the fact to what I learned
in College."

With good reason did Prof. Fiske, after recording the names
of those who joined the church by profession in the summer
term of 1831, close the record by speaking of them as " the
fruits of the revival by which the church and College was
blessed the last term, and for which it is hoped, that many
churches will have occasion to be thankful."

The village church was blessed with a revival of great power
and interest the same year. Four members of the church,
[Dea. Leland, Dea. Mack, Dea. Flagg and Mr. Lyman (father of Henry). Miss
Hannah Lyman, of Vassar College, was one of the converts.]
most of them officers had been praying for it many months
previous, holding meetings for this express purpose at their
houses in rotation attended by themselves alone till at length at
their instance the pastor, Rev. Mr. Washburn, appointed an
inquiry meeting, and to his surprise found it full of anxious
inquirers.
The pastor entered into the work with all his might,
and there was a great ingathering. It was the last work the
good man did ; when it was done, he was ripe for heaven and
ready to depart. College students who were teachers in the
village Sabbath-school, were greatly useful in promoting it, if
not the means of its commencement, and among them Moody
Harrington of the Class of '31 did a work which if he had never
done anything else, would entitle him to a place among those
who are wise and turn many to righteousness. None who heard
him can forget the power and pathos with which he spoke once
at the Sabbath-school concert, and how the whole crowded assembly
were stirred to feeling and action as he pressed home
upon them the question, " Why do we sit still ?" And he spoke
often with scarcely less power in the religious meetings of the
students.
[Mr. Beecher is accustomed to speak of Mr. Harrington as almost his spiritual
father to whom he owed more religiously, than to any other man in College. Mr.
Harrington afterwards married the daughter of Gen. Mack.]

The year 1831 was a year of revivals in the churches. And
wherever the students of Amherst College went wherever the
alumni of Amherst were settled in the ministry, they labored to
promote those revivals in the spirit which they had imbibed in
similar scenes in their Alma and with the wisdom which they
had learned from the instructions and example of their beloved
teachers. " I have enjoyed nine or ten precious revivals in my
ministry, and they are the very brightest spots in my life."
Thus writes an alumnus to whom I am indebted for some of the
most valuable materials of the foregoing history. Scores, probably
hundreds of the alumni, could bear similar testimony.
They learned to believe in revivals, to love them and to labor
successfully in them, while they were members of College.

In the five years beginning with 1827 and ending with 1831,
there were three revivals. Three years now succeeded without
what is technically called a revival, although more than once
during the interval the church was revived, and during each of
these years there were occasional conversions, and additions to
the church by profession at almost every communion. At
length in 1835 when no class remaining in College had witnessed
one of these favored seasons, the Institution was again
blessed by a special outpouring of the Spirit. An account of
it was given to the public through the Boston Recorder by Prof.
Hitchcock, the pastor, Dr. Humphrey, being absent in Europe
for the benefit of his health. From this account we give some
extracts.

" At the commencement of the spring teem, it was evident
that some Christians had begun to set their faces unto the Lord
God to seek by prayer and supplication, with fasting and sackcloth
and ashes for a revival of religion. God had been rebuking
us repeatedly by removing on account of ill health and for
other causes, one and another of the permanent officers of the
Institution, and it became necessary for the President also to
leave for a season on a voyage to Europe for the recovery of
his exhausted energies. And Satan too seized upon this time
of trial and violently attempted to revive his work. But
although he adopted measures which, in this community, were
emphatically new, such as disturbing religious meetings by fireworks,

[Sometimes called the Gunpowder Plot. A train of powder laid under the back
seat from door to door of the old Mathematical Room was exploded during a religious
meeting. The author of the plot was immediately detected and expelled.
The meeting adjourned to another room, and was finished with increased solemnity.]
he succeeded in enlisting but very few on his side ; and
when the faithfnl execution of the laws had removed these from
the Institution, the power of God's Spirit became decidedly manifest,
and the work went steadily forward to the very last day
of the term, a period of six or eight weeks.


The number of
those who were destitute of a hope at the commencement, did
not exceed fifty. Not less than one third of these professed to
have yielded their hearts to God. But it was clear that the
work was the most thorough among professed Christians, several
of whom were brought under deep convictions, and yielded at
length their hearts anew (some of them probably for the first
time) to the Savior.

" We have made it a rule not to interfere at such a season
with the regular College exercises, except in an extreme case.
We adhered to this rule in this instance, except some seasons
devoted to fasting and prayer." Among other special means of
which Prof. Hitchcock speaks as having proved useful, were
" meetings of ten or twelve professing Christians, in which every
individual was urged to express his feelings ;" " a number of
individuals on a certain day visiting all the professors of religion,
with the resolution not to leave them till they had solemnly
promised to renew their consecration ;" or " for an officer during
the day to visit all the members of a class, converse with them
on the subject of personal religion, and affectionately invite them
to a meeting which he would conduct in the evening."

In conformity with their former practice, the Faculty, at
the close of the term, entered the following resolve upon their
records : " Whereas it has pleased God to visit us during the
past term with a precious revival of religion, whereby many
have been quickened and some hopefully converted, therefore
resolved, that we desire to leave this record of the fact as a
testimony of their deep indebtedness to that sovereign mercy
of a covenant-keeping God, and of their obligation to labor with
new courage and zeal in his service."

A few extracts from the recollections of those who were
students at the time, contain some additional details of much
interest :

" I have ever loved to recall the incidents of the revival of
1835. It was a precious season. To a certain little band of
students, whose names I could perhaps give, it was especially
welcome. Day after day and night after night, they had been
praying, both together and apart, in secret places, for just such
a blessing. In some instances they spent, perhaps unwisely, but
with the best intentions, a large part of the night together in
wrestling with God, and sometimes even weeping together, lest
something should be in the way of the descent of the Spirit
during that season. On one occasion, when the result seemed
to human view in considerable doubt, they joined hands, and,
upon their knees, at dead of night, in a room in the old North
College, entered into a solemn covenant with God and with one
another, each praying in his turn, that they would not, God
helping them, give it up, but would plead and labor till the
blessing came. And when the blessing came, and they found
such men as Clark,
[Rev. Clinton Clark, Valedictorian of the Class of '35 of which Peabody was
the Salutatorian, and Tutor from '37 to '41. I have before me very interesting
and instructing narratives of the conversion of Peabody and Humphrey, the former
by Rev. Leander Thompson of the Class of '35, the latter by Rev. William Huntting
of the same class. The former was printed in the Boston Recorder soon after
the death of Prof. Puabody in 1850. But I have not room for the narratives. In
the Humphrey here mentioned, the reader will recognize Rev. John Humphrey, son
of President Humphrey, pastor of the churches in Charlestown and Binghamton,
and Professor elect of Moral Philosophy and Theology in Hamilton College.]
[Rev. Leander Thompson.]
Peabody, Humphrey and Smith of my own
class, and others in other classes, anxious and inquiring or rejoicing
in new found hope, they felt like mounting on wings and
praising God DAY AND NIGHT forever."

The record of the church reads thus: "Clinton Clark, J. B.
Greenough, John Humphrey, William A. Peabody, G. P. Smith,
Lycortas L. Brewer, Alexander H. Bullock, Thomas P. Green,
L. A. Hayward, David S. Oliphant, Isaac Titcomb, Frederic
Dickinson, and Daniel W. Poor, were received by profession.
These are among the fruits of a most interesting revival of
religion during the closing six weeks of the term."

The following extract from a letter of Rev. W. H. Beaman
of the Class of '37, will illustrate the feeling with which this
and other similar seasons of religious interest are remembered
to this day by great numbers of the alumni : " The mention
of these seasons calls up many precious memories. That of
1835, was deep and pervading. The truth fell from the lips of
Humphrey, Hitchcock and Fiske, with great power, searching the
hearts of Christians as well as others. Some who had been exemplary
professors of religion gave up their hopes, and for days
were in despair then the light entered, and they were advanced
to a higher standard of living. How vividly I recall as if it were
yesterday, the sound of prayer in the dormitories, recitation
rooms and groves, the walks and talks of fellow-Christians, of
Christians with their unconverted classmates and other fellowstudents
! With what fresh interest were the Bible, Bunyan,
Baxter and J. B. Taylor perused ! How sacred was the very air
of College, and all its surroundings ! How we inhaled the very
atmosphere of heaven and had foretastes of its blessedness ! "

The reader can not but have remarked the difference between
the converts in the different revivals of this period. Many of
the converts in each and all of them were the most gifted and
influential men in College. But in 1827, these gifted and influential
men, previous to their conversion, were, most of them,
wild, wayward, negligent of study, some of them dissipated
and violently opposed to religion. In 1835, on the contrary,
and to a great extent in 1831, the prominent converts had previously
been studious, amiable, faithful, leading scholars and
exemplary in their whole deportment. Yet all alike felt their
need of a new heart and a new spirit. All alike believed that
when they were converted, they began a higher and better life.
They not only believed this at the time in the flush of excitement,
but they continued to cherish the conviction ever after,,
And they proved not only the sincerity of their conviction, but
the reality of the change by their pure, holy, godly lives. Now
is not the united testimony of such witnesses so various, so
intelligent, so honest and capable is it not sufficient of itself
to vindicate revivals and conversions from the contempt which
many cast upon them who know nothing of them by their own
observation and experience ? Does it not go far to demonstrate
the doctrine which has always been held by the Faculty and the
great majority of the students of Amherst College, that such
revivals are the work of God and are among the richest blessings
which the Institution has ever experienced ?

